Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
---------------------------------------------------
Contents of Vol. 1 no. 9
May 31, 1991
 
1) Reply to Dave Sherman (Ellen Prince)

1)-------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 31 May 91 11:31:51 -0400
From: Ellen Prince <ellen@central.cis.upenn.EDU>
Subject: RE: Yiddish in English

dave sherman writes:

>...words like leyn and shiddukh don't
>have a Jewish-only meaning in *Yiddish*, they do have
>the very restricted meanings I referred to when used
in >English.  Is there a linguistic term for this kind
of >borrowing, which restricts the meaning of the
borrowed >term very narrowly?

the general term, whether it happens to a borrowing or
a native word, is specialization. it's very common with
borrowings, however. the reason generally given is that
the borrowed items have a restricted distribution (i.e.
context of occurrence), so future generations, hearing
them only in that context, inductively infer a concomi-
tant restricted SENSE. some dramatic examples in eng-
lish involve the following pairs:

     calf      veal
     sheep     mutton
     cow       beef
     pig       pork

the first column are native english (germanic) words.
originally, they were used both for the animal and for
the edible meat of the animal. the words in the second
column are borrowed from anglo-norman french (cf.
modern french veau, mouton, boeuf, porc) and ALSO
denoted both the animal and the meat of the animal.
during the norman reign in england (1066-13??), the
upper class spoke french and the servants and peasants
spoke english. so the (upper class) lady of the house
would tell the servant she wanted veal or mutton or
beef or pork for dinner. that is, she was speaking
french. but generations of servants, hearing french and
therefore those terms only from the mouths of the upper
class and the upper class talking about food, not
animals, came to think the words meant only meat. of
course, when the servant went to the peasant to actual-
ly obtain the stuff, i.e. to slaughter and carve the
animal, they'd speak english (calf, sheep, ...), so
THOSE terms became specialized to mean the animal only
and not the meat thereof, which is why they're not
synonyms at all in modern english. (we can infer that
the anglo-normans didn't eat horsemeat, unlike the rest
of the french, from the lack of a term based on
'cheval' for horsemeat in modern english.)

on this analogy, one could hypothesize that, for those
people for whom shidekh means a match between jews,
they (or their parents) heard it used only in contexts
where the people being discussed were jews, 'match' or
whatever being used in other contexts (perhaps by other
speakers, e.g. on the radio or wherever). so shidekh
was understood to MEAN 'match between jews'.

my own private specialization was cottage cheese and
pot cheese. i thought the first meant the pre-packaged
stuff, like breakstone's, whereas i thought the second
meant the loose kind that you bought some quantity of
(in a little white bag). it turns out that cottage
cheese was the native english word and the one general-
ly used across the country, whereas pot cheese was the
dutch borrowing in nyc (the dutch got there first,
remember). so i saw 'cottage cheese' on the national
brands but heard pot cheese used for the loose kind,
and i inferred that the difference had to do with their
meaning, not their history. (now 'pot cheese' has come
to be used nationally--but it wasn't 35-40 years ago,
i'm told.)

as for 'in-group'-ness and language-mixing, if you like
i can send you some references. there's been a lot said
about it, mostly with respect to spanish code-
switching/borrowing in the english of puerto ricans and
chicanos, but it's been claimed for many other instan-
ces as well. it should be pointed out, tho, that not all
borrowings have this effect, and, once they really make
it into the language as a whole, they lose it if they
ever had it. you don't feel warm all over when you hear
someone say 'bagel' or 'schmuck', i bet...

zayt gezunt.
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol 1.009
