
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 6.275
April 4, 1997

1) Yiddish Studies in Israel I (Leonard Prager)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 26 Mar 97 23:48:26 IST
From: rhle302@uvm.haifa.ac.il
Subject: Yiddish Studies in Israel I

[Note:  Having seen an offprint of this important article by
fellow-Mendelist Leonard Prager, the shames suggested that he submit
the following article to Mendele. Due to its length it will appear in
four installments.

It originally appeared in a special Yiddish issue (entitled _Il mondo
yiddish: saggi_) of the venerable Italian-Jewish journal _La Rassegna
Mensile di Israel_, Vol. 63, Nos. 1-2 (January-August 1996), 451-464.
Readers of Italian may be interested in Vol. 62, an anthology of
modern Yiddish literature.  The article appears here with the
permission of the journal.

Let's hope that other Yiddish scholars will choose Mendele as an
additional forum for their work.  nm]

* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *

         Yiddish Studies in Israel Face the Twenty-First Century

                           by  Leonard Prager

The Language Quarrel is Dead

At this season, in late spring, Israelis are flocking to the huge annual
Book Week sales which take place in every city and town, colorful and
festive fairs often accompanied by literary events -- virtually all of
them, like the thousands of new and remaindered books for sale, in
Hebrew.  This is but one of numberless tangible signs that a renativized
Hebrew is the principal language of the renascent state of Israel.

In 1927, a proposal was made to establish a chair in Yiddish studies
at the recently (1925) established Hebrew University.  A donor was
ready with the requisite funds; the chancellor, Rabbi Judah Magnes,
favored the plan, but Hebraist hostility defeated it.(1) Hebraists at
that time feared the competitive threat of Yiddish, the vernacular of
over ten million Jews, and that of most prospective settlers in the
Land of Israel.

The Shoa and the subsequent founding of the State of Israel witnessed
the effective end of the so-called "riv haleshonot" ('language
quarrel'), which in the 1920s and 1930s often exacerbated the life of
the Yishuv.  Yet the two languages had lived side by side harmoniously
for centuries:

"In historical perspective, 'rivalry' between Hebrew and Yiddish is a
recent development, hardly a century old.  The two languages became
competitors under the pressure of profound social and political
changes which assigned ideological and symbolic values to both
languages which neither previously had."(2)

In 1951 the generation-old plan of a Yiddish Chair was resuscitated,
this time successfully.  The chair was offered to the leading world
figure in Yiddish linguistics, Max Weinreich, who had managed to
escape from Vilna, home of the Yivo Institute for Jewish Research, and
settle in New York.  Weinreich, a Bundist, preferred to remain at the
transplanted Yivo, then the leading Yiddish research center in the
world.  The position was offered to Dov Sadan (then Dov Stock), who
accepted -- and the rest is history.

Dov Sadan

The virtuoso Sadan (1902-1989), a prolific and original writer in both
Hebrew and Yiddish (in both of which languages he was an inimitable
stylist), became an institution in himself while he lived.  Israel's
greatest Yiddish poet, Avrom Sutskever, could write of him:  "Er iz
geven an umfarglaykhlekher afile tsvishn umfarglayklekhe" ('Even among
incomparable persons he was incomparable.')  (3) Large numbers of
students streamed to his courses -- both because of his notorious
leniency in assigning grades and the fascination of his lectures.
Most significantly, he trained a number of students who eventually
became leading scholars and critics of Yiddish literature, namely his
direct successor in Jerusalem, Chone Shmeruk, and Dan Miron.  Sadan,
who is said to have used over sixty pseudonyms -- more than any known
Yiddish or Hebrew writer, and whose bibliography fills a substantial
volume, deserves close study and evaluation, as does the archive he
left to the Hebrew University.  Moreover, he was an assiduous letter
writer whose correspondence amounted to thousands of items which have
yet to be collected and ordered.  No writer on Yiddish can fail to be
aware of Sadan's view of Jewish literature as a multilingual unity, of
his lifelong insistence on the Hebrew-Yiddish symbiosis, an emphasis
continued by many Israeli researchers, especially his most
distinguished student, Chone Shmeruk.

Chone Shmeruk

Upon his recent retirement Shmeruk was presented with a festschrift,
the editors saluting him as the historian of Yiddish literature," by
no means an exaggerated title.  (4) Due largely to Shmeruk, the
tradition of historical and textual scholarship remains strong at the
Hebrew University and at the University of Haifa as well.  Though no
one could hope to compete with Sadan, author of hundreds of books and
essays, the present Hebrew University Yiddish Department scholars
(mainly from Latin America) are highly productive.  The department's
special contribution has been to bring unknown and poorly understood
texts to light.  Shmeruk has single-handedly brought coherency to Old
Yiddish studies, penned whole chapters in what is becoming a
comprehensive history of Yiddish literature, edited texts at the
highest standard, shown the intricate relations between Yiddish texts
and classic Hebrew-Aramaic ones, brought order into study of the
Yiddish Biblical play, illuminated Soviet-Yiddish writing, brought to
his examination of every Yiddish text, whether Old Yiddish or
twentieth-century, an eye for allusions, sources, influences,
relationships to other texts and to the life of the author and his
period.  Officially retired, Shmeruk is currently completing a
critical biography of Nobel Prize winner Isaac Bashevis Singer, having
studied Singer's writings in Yiddish for years -- assurance that we
are not going to get some impressionistic Life based on journalism and
English translations.

Yechiel Szeintuch

In scanning the research contributions by members of the Hebrew
University's Yiddish Department one must not overlook the crucial
project of Yechiel Szeintuch.  This Argentinian-born scholar, a
leading student of Hebrew and Yiddish writings produced during the
Shoa period under Shoa conditions, has stubbornly pressed the
distinction -- in terms of both historical validity and aesthetic
power -- between stories and poems composed in the Nazi Hell and those
revised and reshaped after the Shoa.  Szeintuch's work on Yitskhok
Katsenelson, Avrom Sutzkever, Khaym Grade and Shaye Shpigl (Isaiah
Spiegel) are virtually unique in their attention to uncensored Shoa
texts.  No close student of what is loosely termed "Holocaust
literature" can afford not to know Szeintuch's most recent book,
Isaiah Spiegel -- Yiddish Narrative Prose From The Lodz Ghetto; 16
Stories Edited from Rescued Manuscripts with Introductions and a
Series of Oral Interviews with Their Author (Jerusalem:  The Magnes
Press, 1995).

Teaching Yiddish in Hebrew

Sadan attracted _sabras_ ('native-born Israeli Jews') to his
Hebrew-language lectures on Yiddish, the texts studied of course being
in Yiddish.  This pattern of studying Yiddish in Hebrew became
standard at the Hebrew University and later in other universities,
with the partial exception of Bar-Ilan.  It was necessitated by the
simple fact that Israeli students did not know enough Yiddish to study
Yiddish in Yiddish -- at least in the elementary stages.  Some
Yiddishists in and outside of Israel have been very critical of this
practice.  Because Yiddish courses in Israeli universities (as
elsewhere) attract few students it is sometimes necessary to teach
Yiddish texts in Hebrew translation, with special attention given to
the few students who do read Yiddish.  Such arrangements are
especially common where the Yiddish "chativa" ('program') is
administratively part of the Department of Hebrew Literature.  At the
University of Haifa, Yiddish courses are given within the larger
frameworks of the Departments of Hebrew Language and Hebrew Literature
respectively.  Only the Hebrew University and Bar-Ilan Universities
have autonomous departments of Yiddish, though at the latter this
autonomy may be conditional upon outside funding.

                        [end of Part 1]

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 6.275

