
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 2 no. 43
July 23, 1992
 
1) Opera (Blumke Steinberg)
2) Extracts from Chulyot (Leonard Prager)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 22 Jul 92 12:06:58 EDT
From: "Blossom S. Kirschenbaum (Blumke Steinberg)"
<CO401002%BROWNVM.bitnet@YaleVM.YCC.Yale.Edu>
Subject: Opera and Yiddishkayt

Responding to Robert H.'s comment on his immigrant parents'
love of opera, I'd like to say the same was true for my
Papa, born 1895 in Zashkov; he came to New York about 1920,
frequented Second Avenue theaters, the dairy restaurants,
also Katz's Delicatessen; but his great love was opera and
from him I first heard the names of Caruso, Melba,
Beniamino Gigli, etc.  and then saw/heard Ezio Pinza as
Boris Goudenov.  When he told me about Halevy's LA JUIVE, I
understood that opera could be written also by Jews.  Even
before English was fully intelligible, he said, opera was
easy to follow, as were Shakespeare's plays--he understood
that English more readily than ordinary talk.  (Maybe it
was more clearly pronounced.)

He was a plain man, my Papa, not at all a snob; but my
parents knew quality and preferred a little of the best to
a lot of the mediocre or poor. The only salmon or tuna in
our house was Bumble Bee brand--and I know the same was
true in many households; back about 1960, in Cambridge,
gentile friends in a Jewish context were much perplexed by
a conver- sation about parental preference for Bumble Bee,
"we would never have Geisha at our house"--they didn't
"get" this striving for "only the best." Maybe it was an
Americanized extension of "kosher" vs. "treyf."

Youthful rebellion could be as simple as buying the "wrong"
kind of salmon. Things change with time; my children have
other musical preferences than opera; but I'd be surprised
to find in their refrigerators any mayonnaise other than
Hellman's.  Sometimes things skip a generation, too; maybe
an eynikl will value my collection of libretti as I loved
those from Papa.

Blumke Steinberg

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 22 Jul 92 12:04:54 IST
From: Leonard prager <RHLE302@HAIFAUVM.BITNET>
Subject: Abstracts from CHULYOT
 
                             _ABSTRACTS_
            of the Hebrew-language journal _Chulyot_ vol.1, no.1
                        (University of Haifa)
                         Shalom Luria, Editor
 
 
                           Dovid-Hirsh Roskies
 
           Ayzik-Meyer Dik: The Storyteller as Enlightened Maggid

Contrary to earlier studies (the author's included) which
focussed on Ayzik-Meyer Dik as forerunner of all that was
modern in Yiddish folk literature, the present essay begins
with Dik's departure from politics and parody.  For
financial as well as ideological reasons, Dik began to
address himself exclusively to his dear female reader, to
write in the cursed "Jargon" and to present himself as a
staid scholar who, for a change, told stories. From among
all the available Haskala genres -- parody, satire,
quasi-biblical novel, sentimental novel -- Dik selected a
middle path in which fantastic material clashed with its
fellow, and satire warred on Jewish folly in Czarist
Russia. Thanks to his phenomenal output, the insignifant
_mayse-bikhl_ ('storybook') has become a register of
historical progress and a permanent gallery of folk-types,
from rabbis to robbers.  And in one exceptionally
successful work, "Boruske the Watchman," Dik discovered a
substitute "I" in the person of his famous countryman, the
Maggid of Dubno.
 
 
                             Ayzik-Meyer Dik
 
                         The Impoverished One
 
 
An interesting tale about a Jewish merchant from
Nicklesburgh {Yiddish: Niklsburg -- apparently not a real
place, but suggestive of Nikolayev, Ukraine}, Tsodek
Pikante, who lost his property in a fire and became a
pauper.  He left his wife at home and went out into the
world to gather donations.  What helped him was a writ from
the famous rabbi, Reb Shmelke.  Believing his story, the
rabbi took pity on the merchant and provided him with a
written recommendation.  He managed to collect a sum of
money and sold Reb Shmelke's writ to another beggar.  The
latter went abroad, where he died suddenly.  Reb Shmelke's
writ was all that was found on the dead man, and notice was
sent to the widow that her husband was dead.
 
The widow remarried and gave birth to a son.  On the day of
the _bris_ ('circumcision ceremony'), her former husband,
Tsodek Pikante, came home -- after having been robbed on
the way.  An acquaintance in Vilna paid his fare home.  The
wife recognized her husband and, grasping her tragic
situation, fainted.  Understandably, the tale did not have
a happy ending.
 
 
                           Saul Ginzburg
 
                     On the Panic of 1835/1836

The historian Saul Ginzburg (1866-1966), who was also a
student of literature and folklore, discusses in his
introductory essay to Ayzik-Meyer Dik's Hebrew story , "The
Panic," the fiction's historical backround. The cause of
the panic was a supposed decree by Nicolai the First's
minister forbidding Jewish minors to marry, so that the
government could conscript them for military service.  Word
of that would-be decree of 1835 led to widespread panic.
Jews hysterically married off virtually any unmarried
child.  The maskil Ayzik-Meyer Dik mocks the panic, which
he probably observed for himself in the town of Nieswiez
{Yiddish: Nesvizh}.
 
 
                              Ayzik-Meyer Dik
 
                                 The Panic
 
 Ayzik-Meyer Dik first printed this story in Hebrew in 1867
in _HaMelits_  (nos. 41, 42, 43) and a year later, in 1868,
in Yiddish in Vilna under the title "The Town of Havoc."
{The original has "The Town of Heres."  _heres_ is Hebrew
for 'ruin, havoc' -- it is used here as a characteronymic,
like Kaptsansk, etc.}. We reproduce here the Hebrew version
which appeared in the Petrograd journal _Heavar_ ('The
Past') (2 {1918}:34-44), since Saul Ginzburg notes in his
introduction that he printed it from a manuscript.
 
The story recounts in a humourous vein how the Jewish
community in the town of Havoc received the evil decree
forbidding Jewish girls under the age of twelve and Jewish
boys under the age of eighteen to marry. It was like the
fast day of the Ninth of Av.  The community decided to
follow their rabbi's advice and immediately arrange
marriages.  The panic is described as a mad whirlpool
affecting one and all, with parents running amok in the
hope of "rescuing" their children.  A grotesque tale in
every sense of the word!
 
 
                             Shalom Luria
 
           "Table Talk" --  Yude-Leyb Gordon's Yiddish Poems
 
 
It appears that the reknown Hebrew poet and Haskala writer,
Yude-Leyb Gordon (YaLaG), who often vented his antipathy to
Yiddish ("Jargon"), wrote lovely, moving poems in Yiddish
and even assembled them into a booklet (20 poems, 104
pages) whose fourth edition appeared in Vilna in 1899,
seven years after the poet's death!
 
YaLaG's Yiddish poems were popular among readers and surely
deserve an honored place among the bilingual poets of his
generation (Mikhl Gordon, Avrom-Ber Gotlober, Eliezer
Tsvi-Hakoyen Tsveyfl, and even Mendele-Moykher Sforim).  By
analyzing several of his poems, the essay attempts to prove
that YaLaG's poetic achievement in Yiddish deserves the
reader's interest and the critic's attention. It is
important to recall that so embittered a maskil as YaLaG
wrote about Yiddish in the following vein:
 
   "The language of the _Tsenerene_ is holy to me,
    That language which all Jews speak,
    The language of my grandmother Khyene
    (May she enjoy a luminous Paradise!),
    The language of grandmother and grandfather,
    Of my father, of my mother...."
 
 
 
                             Avner Holtsman
 
A Source for Y.-L. Perets' Biography in a Letter from
Yankev Dinezon
 
 The author discusses a letter in Hebrew which the Yiddish
writer Yankev Dinezon wrote to Mikhe-Yoysef Berditshevski
in reply to the latter's request for information on Perets'
life and work. Dinezon was Perets' closest friend and
associate and Berditshevski could assume that the Yiddish
writer probably knew more about Perets than anyone else.
In the first part of his letter, Dinezon writes about the
earliest stages of Perets' life, starting with his
childhood years in Zamosc.  He outlines Perets' artistic
development to the time he becomes the central figure in
Yiddish literature.  In the second part of the letter,
Dinezon expresses his own views regarding the linguistic
and literary relations between Hebrew and Yiddish.  In
addition, he discusses some of his own ideas regarding the
creative process, including the use in his fiction of
autobiographical material. The author deals with the
personal and literary relations between the three artists
-- Berditshevski, Dinezon and Perets -- and places
Dinezon's letter within its larger historical and cultural
context.
 
 
                            Abraham Novershtern
 
The Dance of Death: On Perets' _At Night in the Old Market Place_
 
 An analysis of the first critical response to Perets'
drama -- a 1908 article by the Bundist critic B. Vladek --
helps place the play in the twilight atmosphere which
dominated Yiddish literature after the failure of the first
Russian revolution.  In analyzing the figure and the speech
of the batkhn ('jester'), one realizes how _At Night in the
Old Market Place_ reflects Perets' literary and spiritual
self-struggle: on the one hand an approach suggestive of
the later Haskala and on the other an augury of Yiddish
modernism -- despite Perets' reservations regarding
contemporary modernism.  These meanings in the text assert
themselves because the text itself assigns a central place
to the theme of death, to apocalyptic strivings and to
metaphysical wrestling with the mood of the times.
 
 
                        Avidov Lipsker
 
                        The Tenth Muse
 
 
The four issues of Uri-Tsvi Grinberg's _Albatros_, which
appeared in Warsaw and Berlin from 1922 to 1923, are a kind
of milestone in the integration of poetic, publicistic,
graphic and typographic values.  In the graphic
configuration of _Albatros_ one recognizes the character of
Yiddish modernism, with its expressionist and avantgarde
qualities. This modernism was crystallized in the "Yung
yidish" circle in Poland. The editor Uri-Tsvi Grinberg
cleverly adopted this new direction, and especially the
devices known to him from the German press (particularly
the periodicals _Action_ and _Der Sturm_) and from the
publishing activities which grew up around them. The author
tries to show how typographical ideas turned up in
_Albatros_ and underwent changes there, largely because of
the contribution of the artist Henrik Barlevi, the student
of El Lisitski, who was a pioneer of avantgarde typography
in Europe before World War II.  He gives the esthetic and
poetic approach of _Albatros_, which established the
invaluable foundations of Uri-Tsvi Grinberg's activity, not
only as modern poet, but as initiator of the artistic
design of books and periodicals in the Land of Israel from
1924 onwards.
 
 
                          Leonard Prager
 
                 On Avrom Sutskever's "To Poland"
 
 
Avrom Sutskever's "To Poland" is a deeply-engaged poem,
product of the poet's hurt and disillusion at encountering
renewed antisemitism in liberated Poland, which he visited
on his way to Western Europe after leaving the Soviet
Union. It is also the poet's lament _cum_ celebration of
the great moments in what often seemed like a Polish-Jewish
symbiosis.  For the sake of the few who sacrificed their
lives in saving Jews, the poet refrains from judging the
entire Polish people and he does not cry out for revenge.
But he understands that Jewish life in Poland belongs to
the Past.  With grief at leaving the ancient cemeteries and
joy at looking forward to life in the Land of Israel, the
poet says good-bye to Poland.
 
 
                           Abraham Novershtern
 
                   Der Nister's Letters to Shmuel Niger
 
 
Thirty-four letters which Der Nister wrote to Shmuel Niger
during the years 1907 to 1913 are given here.  Together
with one letter already published, this group encompasses
Der Nister's entire correspondence of literary import which
is in the Shmuel Niger Collection at YIVO. There emerges
from this correspondence a picture of a complex
relationship between writer and editor.  It appears that
even though Niger reacted nagatively to Der Nister's first
work, the writer valued the critic's opinion highly.  It is
quite possible that Niger's judgements significantly
influenced the direction and character of Der Nister's art.
From the notes to the letters one learns of several unknown
works by Der Nister which appeared in the Yiddish press
(among them an early translation into Russian), of reviews
of his books in Russian-Jewish periodicals, and of
publisher's offers which stimulated Der Nister to translate
children's literature into Yiddish and to begin his
original work in that genre.
 
(abstracts edited and translated by Leonard Prager)

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol 2.43

If your message is intended for MENDELE, please write to:

                 mendele@vax1.trincoll.edu

If you want to discuss personal business or have a shmues with
the shames, please write to:

                 nmiller@vax1.trincoll.edu

Please sign your articles.
 
