
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 4.102
September 8, 1994

1) Romanization (Zellig Bach)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 05 Sep 94 15:42:35 EDT
From: Zellig@aol.com
Subject: Romanization Must Mirror Correct Yiddish Spelling

a)  What Is The Mendele Group About?

This question was raised by Prof. Nathan Kravetz in his recent
Introduction (4.069,2).  It is, indeed, a very good question  Apart from
the general statement "Yiddish Literature and Language" on the masthead
of the Mendele Bulletins ("Volumes"), no specifics are ascribed to the
group except the generalized sense of interest.

I believe that Mendele is a clearing house for ideas and suggestions
pertaining to all phases of Yiddish literature and Yiddish language, an
exchange forum for queries and answers, and, ultimately but not last, as
I stated in a previous posting, a society (a khavruse) to learn (although
as yet not a learned society).

This wish to learn Yiddish, an inner self-directed urge to acquire
Yiddish--whether to speak it, to write, or to read  it--is strikingly
evident in a number of Introductions.  R. C. McKenzie-Boone (4.058,1)
wrote:  "I have subscribed to the Mendele list hoping to learn more about
this interesting language."  Robert Klein (4.077,1):  "I subscribed to
Mendele to learn some Yiddish."  Janice Solomon (4.080,2) expressed it
most directly:  "I hope this is a good place to learn [Yiddish]."
Others, too, gave it as one of their reasons for joining Mendele.

b)  Many Postings in Romanized Yiddish

I see much romanized postings in Mendele.  On the one hand it is very
good since Mendele is not published in the Yiddish alphabet proper (i.e.
in a'lefbeys, in yidish gufe).  On the other hand, I take it, many
Mendelyaner might not be able to read it if it were in the Yiddish
a'lefbeys. On the third hand, however (<g>),  this represents a special
problem:  the romanization, as practiced in Mendele, does not follow the
strict and long-accepted rules of Yiddish spelling.

c)  Spelling Conventions? Rules?

In a recent posting a new member wrote:  "I think in Yiddish anything
goes in spelling and pronunciation."  What nonsense!  Would anyone
presume to say this of ANY other language?

Pronunciation, indeed, varies according to the place or region where one
was born, and it depends on the local dialect or subdialect;  but so far
as spelling is concerned, there are historically long-established
conventions--rules--that one better adheres to if he wishes to be a
respected member of his group, in good standing as a cultured person.
One may fight these conventions at his own risks.  (You may not like, for
instance, the vagaries of English spelling, for example the /gh/ for /f/,
as in laughter or enough, but if you were to insist on writing and
publishing something in your own idiosyncratic spelling [lafter, enuf,
or, as an expression of ridicule, "ghish" for fish] you will not be taken
seriously.)  Respect for the language, for any language, and
self-respect, demand adherence to established rules of grammar and
syntax.

d)  Worry about Grammar?

Recently one Mendelyaner advised another:  "Dont worry what your Yiddish
sounds like or about your grammar... all of us, not native speakers, go
around correcting each other."  Of course, one should not worry about his
grammar to such an obsessive degree that it might paralyze his speech.
But concern about grammar--and syntax--is appropriate for non-native and
native speakers since both are the foundations of a language and the
legitimate coin for an exchange of written and printed communications in
society.

e)  Why Should Romanization Reflect Correct Yiddish Spelling?

Since many new Mendelyaners, and possibly some oldtimers, are bent on
learning Yiddish from Mendele, the danger lurks that they would accept it
as correct Yiddish spelling.  And if one should get the idea, unlikely as
it may sound, to reverse the process and try to write Yiddish on the
basis of the romanized Yiddish in Mendele, all the errors will show up
anew.  So I offer here some _general_ correctives.

I can readily anticipate the reactions to my last sentence:  some
reflexively raised eyebrows and some openly challenging  questions:  Who
are you to correct us?  Who needs it?  What are your credentials?

My answers, in order, are:  First, please do not take it personally.  I
am not aiming to correct anyone individually.  Second, Yiddish needs it,
Yiddish demands it, our love for Yiddish dictates it.  Third, herewith my
credentials.

f)  In Lieu of an Introduction

I am a native, educated speaker of Yiddish.  I was co-editor of the daily
Yiddish newspaper _Folksblat_ (Kovne, Lithuania).  The chief editor was
the late Yudl Mark, a famous Yiddish pedagogue, author of the _gramatik
fun der yidisher klal-shprakh_ (1978), editor for many years of YIVO's
bi-monthly journal "di yidishe sprakh."  I was also a foreign corres-
pondent of the daily _Haynt_  (Warsaw, Poland).

In the United States I published a lengthy essay "a matseyve af a shtetl"
in the _Tsukunft_, many papers (in Yiddish and English) in the _Forward_
and a number of articles in _afn shvel_ where I am a member of the
editorial board.

I wrote and published a sharp, exhaustIve critique of the Yiddish
translation of the 1990 questionnaire of the Census Bureau.  It was
called "The Scandalous Yiddish Guide of the Census Bureau" and after many
rejections from the general media it was finally published in the _Jewish
Press_ (Brooklyn), in the language quarterly_Verbatim_, and in the
_Congress Monthly_ of the American Jewish Congress.  _Verbatim_  followed
up my critique with six postscripts:  Five by Bach and one by Steinmetz.

Recently I published in _afn shvel_ a lengthy essay "der kamf fun a
shoymer yidish mitn tsenzus b'yuro," chronicling the many difficulties in
placing in the general media and even in the Jewish-English journals an
article in defense of Yiddish.

g)  Let's Start With Some Minor, Random Correctives:

Meyvn:  It is a universal prime condition that spelling must be
consistent.  How is one to learn from Mendele when in the same Volume the
selfsame word is spelled one way (meyvin) and on the very next page it is
spelled differently (maven)?  See Uriel Weinreich's _Modern
English-Yiddish/Yiddish-English Dictionary_ (p. 235):  meyvn, singular;
mevinim, plural (not mavens).

No double consonants:  Write:  ale, alemen, bobe, feder, got [God],
shabes, yidish (not alle, allemen, bobbe, fedder, gott, shabbes,
yiddish). [The double /b/ in "shabbes" is an unnecessary borrowing from
the English 'Sabbath.']

A double consonant occurs in Yiddish only when the last letter of a
prefix and the initial letter of the verb are the same, for example,
faRRikhtn, to repair.

By the way, when I write or publish someting in Yiddish, I sign my first
name Zelig (one lamed).

Write:  gezunt (not gezundt).  (A gezunt dir in kepele (:-); a gezunt
aykh in kop :-).

Excise the puste (empty) h's:  No h's after the stressed vowel in words
of German origin.  Write:  amol. yor, geyn, shteyn (not amohl, yohr,
gehn, shtehn).  And no h's after the final vowel in words of Hebrew or
Slavic origin.  Write:  khale, kale, khevre,  metsie, take (not khaleh,
kaleh, khevreh, metsieh, takeh).

Skip the shtume (silent) e's:  Write:  bisl, fargesn, gutn, lakhn, zisn,
shtetl (not bisel, fargesen, guten, lakhen, zisen, shtetel).

A dank IN foroys:  Delete the In.  It is a direct transplant from the
English.  Totally superfluous in Yiddish.

Litvak Yiddish:  No such thing.  Litvak is the designation of a male Jew
born in Lithuania (occasionally pejorative), litvatshke (female),
litvakes (plural).  When you wish to indicate the dialect, refer to
_litvish_ Yiddish, or to the Northeastern Yiddish, as charted in the
Yiddish_Atlas_..

Request to the Family:

If you think this type of posting is constructive, please write to
Mendele.

kh'vinsh aykh alemen a freylekhn, zisn yor, mit gezunt un hatslokhe in
alts vos ir tut!

Zellig Bach

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 4.102

Mendele has 2 rules:

	1. Provide a meaningful Subject: line
	2. Sign your article (full name please)

A Table of Contents is now available via anonymous ftp, along with weekly
updates.

Anonymous ftp archives available on:
          ftp.mendele.trincoll.edu
          in the directory pub/mendele/files

Archives available via gopher on:
        gopher.cic.net

Send articles to:
        mendele@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

Other business:
        nmiller@mail.trincoll.edu


