
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 6.104
November 24, 1996

1) The survival of Yiddish (Mechel Asheri)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 24 Nov 1996 01:13:57 +0200
From: donnom@netvision.net.il
Subject: The survival of Yiddish

Talk about language mortality as it applies to Yiddish seems ever with
us. Is Yiddish a dead language?  Obviously not: I speak it every day of
the week. Nonetheless, while there is much talk, there appears to be
little tachlis and there are verifiable facts to which, I am sure, much
can be added by knowledgeable observers.

All linguists who deal with the subject base their assessments of  the
survival status of a language on a single criterion: is it spoken by
children? Michael Krauss says: "languages no longer learned as mother
tongue by children are beyond mere endangerment...they are already
doomed to extinction , like species lacking a reproductive capacity".
Later he refers to "the number of those (languages) "still spoken by
children", a radical difference and one which applies particularly to
Yiddish.

Tapani Salminen in The UNESCO Red Book on Endangered Languages is quite
clear in his definitions:

Endangered: some children speakers but decreasingly so.

Seriously Endangered: having speakers but practically without children
among them.

Yiddish is defined by Salminen as seriously endangered and the reason
given is that "..a small number of children learn the language but very
few of them become active users".

It is here that we must examine what the situation really is with regard
to Yiddish. When we do, we will find that Salminen is somewhat wide of
the mark, and that the situation of the survival of Yiddish is far more
complex than simply whether there are children who speak it or not and
how many of them there are. It is here that the observations of members
of Mendele  can be of great use. I think we would all be interested
hearing from members with concrete data to offer. Perhaps I may start
with my own observations on a few basic facts.

In the first place it can safely be said that well over ninety five
percent of active male Yiddish speakers under the age of  forty -- those
who use it within their peer group every day -- wear black, have beards
and (usually) peyes and are married to women who cover their hair.

To those who think of Yiddish in terms of literature, this is an
unpleasa nt observation, since these Jews do not read Yiddish. They
speak it, it i s the language of their homes (although this will have to
be more closely defined) but the language they read  is Hebrew because
what they are interested in is written in Hebrew. There is little in
Yiddish  that attract s them. They may also read the language of the
land in which they live to some degree, but almost entirely in
newspapers.

Now, as to their children, who are the criterion by which language
vitality is defined, Krauss's question must be asked, "do they learn
Yiddish as their mother tongue?" The answer to this is that increasingly
even among the "haredim" --the beard-and-peyes Yidn-- those households
in which Yiddish is the only language ever spoken are few in number. The
children attend schools in which the medium of instruction is Yiddish
and they are not permitted to speak anything else in the classroom, but
what happens when they are out on the street? In how many places in the
world is it possible to hear Yiddish spoken among children at play?

I have heard children at play speaking Yiddish to each other in Boro
Park, in Williamsburg and in Crown Heights, as well as such disparate
places as Ashdod, Petach Tikva and Safed in Israel, but for whatever my
own obse rvations are worth the cut-off point is usually around the age
of six. Af ter that, they continue to speak it in class and to a certain
extent in o ther situations - the synagogue in particular - but outside
those situati ons and places tend to revert to the language of the land.
There are, of course, exceptions: Mea Shearim (but only in part) in
Jerusalem and such self-contained Chasidic enclaves as Nay Skver in New
York. Nonetheless, even here, Yiddish, while it is not yet a second
language, may well be a generatrion from now since the children as they
grow bigger find themselve s more comfortable in the language spoken
outside the home..

To give an example, not concerning children but their fathers, young
men, in a hasidic shul in Bnei Brak which I know very well, I found that
the men tend to speak Yiddish to each other in shul, but the moment they
step out in the street, they switch to Hebrew. In addition, I notice
that while both they and their wives speak fluent Yiddish, it is rare
to hear them speak anything but Hebrew (or English or Hungarian)
between themselves.

In the most Orthodox shul in Caracas, Venezuela (and Latin America is
still one of the strongholds of Yiddish), Yiddish is the only language
heard in the announcements given every Shabbos, in any shiurim given by
the ra bbi or another learned member of the congregation, a  hesped, the
convers ation around the shaloshudes table etc. Nonetheless, there are
very few m embers who speak it among themselves outside the shul. There
the language s tend to be English and Hungarian. Spanish, while spoken
fluently by almost everyone, somehow past nit among the Ashkenazi
Jews. In general, Haredi children  over six years old tend to speak the
language of the land to each other even in shul unless there are severe
restrictions against doing so. This includes places like Caracas, where
the only people who spea k Spanish in shul are usually children.

It must be remembered that before the Holocaust Jewish communities were,
if not hermetically sealed off from the world of the non-Jews, so close
to it as made little difference. Today, with exceptions such as those
cited above, this is no longer true and  Jewish communities are not
isolated in the same sense that the shtetlach were. The result has been
the gradual replacing of Yiddish as a vernacular and its metamorphosis
into a langua ge used only on special occasions and for special
purposes, a phenomenon which has not gone unobserved by many students of
language over the past fifty years. Nonetheless, the actual extinction
of Yiddish does not seem very likely to happen in any future that we can
see, since it is the lang uage of instruction in the haredi primary
schools and in the greater part of the Yeshivas. Where it is going to
disappear is in the non-haredi com munities and that is something that
must be faced.

Even among the haredim we see signs of the encroachment of the  la"z .
An extremely conservative Ashkenazi yeshiva such as Ponievezh in Bnei
Brak gives many of its shiurim in Hebrew today and several yeshivas in
the United States, particularly the more modern ones - Yitzhak Elkhanan
(Yeshiva University) for example, teach most of their shiurim in
English, because as every year passes, the young men who attend these,
yeshivos simply don't have enough Yiddish to understand their teachers.

That Yiddish will survive as a living language there is little doubt,
but within a generation the yidn who speak it will be people who have
little in common with most of the members of Mendele. To them Yiddish
will be more and more what it already is: a cultural museum piece in
which we all take delight, but which few take seriously enough to pass
on to their children.

Mechel Asheri
Petach Tikva

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 6.104

