
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 07.190
April 26, 1998

1) 55th Anniversary of Warsaw Ghetto Uprising (Iosif Vaisman)
2) Emanuel Ringelblum's last letter from Warsaw (Iosif Vaisman)
3) vegn oifshtand inem varshever geto (Shmuel Batt)
4) Warsaw ghetto Yiddish bibliography (Iosif Vaisman)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 26 Apr 1998 15:18:02 -0700
From: Iosif Vaisman <iiv@mmlds1.pha.unc.edu>
Subject: 55th Anniversary of Warsaw Ghetto Uprising

This year marks fifty fifth anniversary of the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising. 
Commemorating the anniversary this issue of Mendele includes excerpts from
Emanuel Ringelblum's last letter from Warsaw addressed to YIVO and a group of
Yiddish writers describing Yiddish cultural and educational activities in the
ghetto, a fragment from the Shmuel Batt's book "Oyf Eybik" and a bibliography
of Yiddish sources on Warsaw ghetto uprising. 

Iosif Vaisman

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 26 Apr 1998 15:19:09 -0700
From: Iosif Vaisman <iiv@mmlds1.pha.unc.edu>
Subject: Emanuel Ringelblum's last letter

Warsaw, March 1, 1944

Dear Friends:

We write to you at a time when 95 per cent of the Polish Jews have already
died in the throes of horrible tortures in the gas chambers of the
annihilation centers in Treblinka, Sobibor, Chelmno, Oswiecim or were
slaughtered during the numberless "liquidation campaigns" in the ghettos and
camps. [...] That any of us, the community workers, who carry on under
conditions of twofold secrecy, will outlive the war, we greatly doubt. We,
therefore, want to take this means to tell you in brief about those activities
which link us most closely to you. [...]

The watchword of the organized groups of the Jewish community was "To live
with honor and die with honor!" We made every effort to carry out this
watchword in the ghettos and concentration camps. An expression thereof was
the wide scope of the cultural work which was undertaken notwithstanding the
horrible terror, hunger and poverty and which grew and spread until the martyr
death of Polish Jewry. 

At the time when the Warsaw Ghetto was hermetically sealed, a clandestine
cultural organization was formed with the name Jewish Cultural Organization
(YIKOR). It conducted broad educational work, organized series of lectures,
literary anniversaries (in honor of I. L.  Peretz, Sholem Aleikhem, Mendele,
Borokhov, etc.) and literary and dramatic programs. The spirit of the YIKOR
was the young scholar Menakhem Linder, an economist, murdered by the Germans
as early as April 1942. 

Under the cloak of the children's kitchen and homes of the CENTOS, a net of
underground schools of various ideological trends was spread (CISHO, Tarbut,
Shul-Kult, Yavne, Horeb, Beth Jacob etc.). The secular schools using Yiddish
as the language of instruction were particularly active.  They were organized
by the unforgettable leaders Shakhne Zagan and Sonia Nowogrudzki, both of whom
were sent to death in Treblinka. 

Clandestine central Jewish archives were formed under the innocent name of
Oneg Shabbat. Under the direction of Dr. Emanuel Ringelblum [...] the archives
amassed materials and documents relating to the martyrology of the Jews in
Poland. Thanks to the intensive work of a large staff, tens of crates were
collected with extraordinarily valuable documents, diaries, memoirs,
reportages, photographs, etc. All of these materials were buried in <...>; we
have no access to them.  Most of the material sent abroad originates from our
archives. We raised a cry to the world with exact information about the
greatest crime in history. We are still continuing the archival work.
Notwithstanding the terrible conditions we are still collecting memoirs and
documents about the martyrdom of the Jews, their struggle and the present
living conditions of the remnants of the Polish Jews, in 1941 and 1942 we were
in contact with <...> in Vilna, who, under German control, classified the
materials of the Yiddish Scientific Institute - YIVO and secretly hid a good
deal of them. Now there are no more Jews left in Vilna. The great center of
Jewish culture and of modern research work has been completely destroyed. 

Lively, underground educational activities were conducted by almost all
parties and ideological groups, particularly youth organizations. During
almost the entire time in which the Ghetto existed, an underground press
issued newspapers, journals and miscellaneous volumes. An especially
stimulating press was maintained by the following organizations: Jewish
Workers Alliance - Bund (Bulletin, Tsayt-Fragn, Yugnt-Shtime, Za Nasza i Wasza
Wolnosc, Nowa Mlodziez), Left-Wing Poalei Zion (Proletarisher Gedank,
Yugnt-Ruf, Avangard, Nasze Hasla), Hashomer Hazair (Przedwiosnie, Jutrznia,
Oipbroiz and a number of miscellanies), Dror (Dror-Yedies, Hamadrikh, Genre an
Payn), Right-Wing Poalei Zion (Bafreiung); the anti-fascist bloc (Der Ruf);
the Communists (Morgen Freiheit) and others. Some of these periodicals
published in Warsaw were circulated in all the ghettos, despite the
overwhelming contact and communication difficulties. 

The center for child welfare, CENTOS, conducted many cultural activites among
the great masses of children and youth [...]. A central library for children
and a theater were created [...]. Courses were given in the Yiddish language
and literature. Especially impressive were the cultural and artistic
performances given during the "Children's Month," when the audience,
consisting of thousands of weary spectators, came to spend a few carefree
hours with the children and thus, for a short time, escape from the nightmare
of reality. Hundreds of children from the CENTOS homes and from the schools
participated in these performances which rose to a high artistic level. Today
there are no more Jewish children in Poland! Ninety-nine percent of them were
murdered by the Hitler criminals. 

Within the Ghetto, a symphony orchestra was formed [...]. Excellent choral
groups were formed: the children's choir, led by J. Fevishis, was a great
success [...].  The Jewish artists and sculptors who lived in dire need
occasionally displayed their masterpieces [...]. 

[...] Remember that our workers were ever faithful to the ideals of our
culture until their dying moments. The flag of culture and of struggle with
barbarism was clenched in their hands until death. 

When the period of murderous deportations began, the slogan of self-help was
abandoned for the idea of active resistance. Our youth of all the movements,
especially of the pro-Palestine organizations, revealed its indomitable
courage; it was the onset of the colossal epic by the armed Jewish battle in
Poland; the heroic defense of the Warsaw Ghetto, the illustrious battle in
Bialystok, the destruction of the extermination dens in Treblinka and Sobibor,
the battles in Tarnow, Bendzin, Czestochowa and other places.  The Jews showed
the world that they could fight, weapon in hand, that they know how to die
honorably in the battle against the deadly enemy of the Jewish nation and of
all humanity. [...]

Whether we shall have the opportunity to meet with you is doubtful. To all the
workers for Jewish culture, writers, journalists, musicians, sculptors and all
the contributors to modern Jewish culture and fighters for national liberation
and the cause of mankind, we send our warmest greetings. 

Dr. E. Ringelblum

Notes: Emanuel (Menahem) Ringelblum (1900-l944) - Jewish historian and
educator from Warsaw.  Soon after the establishment of the Warsaw Ghetto, he
founded a secret historical and literary society under the code name Oneg
Shabbat. The society maintained secret archives chronicling the life and
martyrdom of Polish Jewry under the German occupation. These archives, hidden
in several places in Warsaw, were discovered after the war; they constitute
the most extensive documentary source about Jewish life in Poland during the
Holocaust. Ringelblum, who had escaped the ghetto and lived in a hideout in
the "Aryan" section of Warsaw, was killed on March 6, 1944 five days after
sending this letter, along with 35 others when the Nazis discovered their
clandestine abode. 

The letter, dated March 1, 1944 was written in code and signed by Ringelblum
and one of his associates. It was addressed to YIVO, the Yiddish PEN Club,
Sholem Asch, Haim Leivick, Joseph Opatoshu and Raphael Mahler. Published in
Jewish Frontier 12, no. 2 (February 1945), pp. 14-15. Reprinted from "The Jew
in the modern world: a documentary history" (Eds.: Paul Mendes-Flohr and
Jehuda Reinharz) / New York:  Oxford University Press, 1995. 

Iosif Vaisman

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 23 Apr 1998 14:57:12 -0700
From: samuel batt <sambatt@1stnetusa.com>
Subject: vegn oifshtand inem varshever geto dem 19 april 1943

vi an optseykhenung funem 55-tn yor zint dem heldishn oifshtand in Warshever
geto, bring ikh do an oistsug fun mayner a dertseylung "Oif Eybik" nokh
velkher kh'hob gegebn dem nomen fun maynem a bukh:
             
                     "Oif Eybik"
                      (oistsug)
 
untn,oif der tsekhrasteter un tseshoiberter gas, hot di shiseray plutsem
oifgehert. s'iz gevorn mitamol azoy shtil, az m'hot gekont hern vi der yunger
april-vint, eynzam un faryosemt, blondzhet arum in di oisgehoilte moyern,
baveynt shtil un troyerik di toyte in di leydike dires,zukht un nishtert un
kon nit gefinen far sikh a mokem mnukhe. 
  
do, oibn,oifn tsekalietshetn boidem, nebn di fentster mit oisgehakte shoibn un
remlekh hot men gekont iberkhapn dem otem, opvishn dem gedikhtn shveys funem
shtern, a kuk tun oif vi lang s'veln nokh stayen di patronen un granatn, un
nikhter, on baputseray, a gribl tun in der eygener neshome, tsunoifnemen di
tseshtreyte gedanken. 
 
nekhame hot avekgeshtelt di ongevaremte funem shisn biks, hot funandergelozt
dem shvern shvartsn kublik oifn kop un forzikhtig arop- gekukt in gas arayn.
in der fargeyindiker tunkl-rosever zun, vos hot zikh shoin kimat bahaltn oif
yener zayt geto-moyer, tsvishn groye un alts mer shvartsverendike shotns hobn
es-es soldatn tsunoifgeshlept di toyte un farvundete un tsurikgetsoign zikh
mekhuts der moyer. inmitn gas iz dem tsveytn tog geshtanen a farbrenter
daytshisher tank. fun zayn ofenem liuk hot aroisgeshtartshet a farkoilter guf
fun a tankist, vos hot nisht bavizn aroiskrikhn funem fayerdikn keyver. a
getrofener fun an oifshtendlerisher koil, iz er geblibn hengen a
toyt-farsarfeter. unter di yidfishe zalpn hobn di fashistn nisht bavisn im
aroystsushlepn. un azoy iz er geblibn in zayn untergehaktn tank vi a shtumer
eydes tsu der miser ershter mapole funem soine inem yidishn geto. 

[...]

s'hot zikh farendikt der tsweyter tog fun di kamfn. inem ershtn tog zenen di
es-es soldatn arayn in geto zayendik zikher, az zey veln shnel endikn di
operatsie: aroysfirn ale yidn tsum umshlagplats un fun dort kayn treblinke un
maydanek. bagegnt mit fayer fun di,dukht zikh puste hayzer, hobn zey opgetrotn
un gepruvt nokhamol. ober dos fayer fun pistoletn, biksn un granatn iz gevorn
nokh shtarker. ven der tank iz getrofn gevorn mit a tsind-kokteyl un iz
farbrent gevorn, ven oifn bruk zenen geblibn lign in zeyer eygenem arishn blut
toyte un farvundete, hobn di es-esovtses zikh tsurikgetsoygn oiser di moyern.
shpeter hobn zey arayngefirt in shlakht shver mashinen-gever, un zenen vider
gekumen.ober zeyer ongrif iz, vi frier, opgeshlogn gevorn.oifn tsveytn tog
zenen di kamfn gevorn nokh mer farbisn. un vider hobn di daytshn gemuzt
fasrlozn dos geto. 
  
fun di hayzer un bunkers zenen arois yunge un alte,mener un froyen, oisgedarte
un oisgemutshete, un hobn genumen tantsn mit freyd un islayves. di onfirer fun
di kamfs-grupn hobn koim gekont poiln, az zey zoln tsurikgeyn tsu di
baheltenishn in di khoreve hayzer. 
 
di kleyne grupe oifshtendler hot far di tsvey teg farloirn tswey kemfer.s'iz
gefaln di farbindlern funem "Hashomer Hatsair", di freylekh- shtiferishe
serke. in shverste un fintserste minutn hot zi keynmol nit farloirn ir
lebnslust. epes an umfarshtendlekher kval fun freylekhkayt hot geshpritst fun
ir, afile ven zi hot gehungert, ven tsu ire akhtsn yor iz zi gevorn a
kaylekhdige yesoyme,- ale ire noente zenen oisgegangen fun hunger. zi hot
untergenumen dem kamf un nisht getrakht az zi kon dershosn vern. in ir
onvezkayt hot yedn opgelozt di more shkhoire un s'fleg vern laykhter oif der
neshome.
 
zi is gefaln oifn untershtn shtok. a daytshishe oitomat-serie hot
durkhgelekhert ir meydlishe brust, un zi is geblibn lign mitn nagan in der
hant.oif ir yung ponem is farglivert gevorn a shmeykhl fun farvunderung, a
nisht aroisgezogte frage:"Shoin? Azoi gikh is es geshen?"-

shmuel batt

4)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 24 Apr 1998 16:33:18 -0700
From: Iosif Vaisman <vaisman@gibbs.unc.edu>
Subject: Warsaw ghetto bibliography

The following list includes several important references on Warsaw ghetto in
Yiddish. Larger bibliography is available in Shtetl library 
(http://sunsite.unc.edu/yiddish/library/warsaw-ghetto.html).

Geto in flamen : zamlbukh / Nyu-York: Amerikaner reprezentants fun "Bund" in
Poyln, 1944. 206 p. 

Mendelson, S. Der vidershtand in varshever geto / New York, 1944. 26 p. 

Yizker tsum yortog funm oyfshtand in Varshever geto, April-May 1943 /
Ramat-Gan: Defus "Liga", 1944. 45 p.

Fefer, I. Shotns fun varshever geto / Nyu-York: Ikuf, 1945. 76 p. 

Seidman, H. Tog-bukh fun varshever geto / Buenos Ayres, Nyu York: 
Tsentral-Farband fun Poylishe Yidn in Argentine ; Federatsye fun Poylishe Yidn
in Amerike, 1947. 335 p.

Goldstein, B. Finf yor in Varshever geto / Nyu-York: Farlag "Unzer Tsayt",
1947. 498 p.

Mark, B. Der ofshtand fun varshever geto / Moskve, Melukhe-Farlag "Der
Emes," 1947. 206 p. 

Mark, B. Dos bukh fun gvure / Lodzsh: Dos naye lebn, 1947. 

Turkow, J. Azoy iz es geven : hurbn Varshe / Buenos Ayres:  Tsentral-farband
fun Poylishe Yidn in Argentine, 1948. 543 p.

Hurbn un oyfshtand fun di Idn in Varshe : eydes-bleter un azkores / Tel Aviv:
Vaadat ha-golah fun der Algemeyner Idisher Arbeter-Organizatsye (ha-Histadrut
ha-kelalit) in Erets-Yisroel un Idish-Natsyonaler Arbeter-Farband in Amerike,
1948. 2 v. (720 p.) 

In heldishn gerangl : (der onteyl fun "Bund" in di geto-kamfn) :  zamlbukh
tsum 6-tn yortog fun heldishn vidershtand in Varshever geto / New York: Farlag
Unzer tsayt, 1949. 285 p. 

Ringelblum, E. Notitsn fun varshever geto / Varshe; Yidish Bukh, 1952. 352 p.

Ringelblum, E. Ksovim fun geto / Varshe: Yidish Bukh, 1961. 2 v., 23 cm.

Iosif Vaisman
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 07.190

Address for the postings to Mendele: mendele@lists.yale.edu
Address for the list commands: listproc@lists.yale.edu

Mendele on the Web:

http://mendele.commons.yale.edu
http://sunsite.unc.edu/yiddish/mendele.html



