
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 5.046
June 10, 1995

1) Kroyvets (Bernard S. Greenberg)
2) Kroyvets/kroyvoys (Eliyahu Juni)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 9 Jul 1995 13:57:10 -0400
From: bsg@basistech.com
Subject: Kroyvets

I had always assumed that Mr. Krawitz down the hall was merely the Polish
Jewish version of Mr. Schneider (Pol., "krawiec", tailor). Is there
something hidden or clever going on here in the history of this name, or
is this a red herring...

Bernard S. Greenberg

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 10 Jul 1995 05:32:12 -0400
From: ao107@freenet.carleton.ca
Subject: Kroyvets/kroyvoys

In volume 5.040, I wrote that "kroyvets" is a corruption of the Hebrew
word "kroyvoys".  In vol. 5.043, Paul Pascal and Mikhl Herzog sent in
alternative etymologies:  Paul suggested it is an acronym of the posuk
'Koyl Rino Vishuo B'oholey Tsadikim', and Mikhl cited the _Tishbi_, who
says it has a Romance derivation.  Both of these responses surprised me:
I have always seen and heard "kroyvets" and "kroyvoys" used
interchangeably (in speech and writing), and never doubted the
connection.  The only difference I noticed was that "kroyvets" was
treated as a singular noun, while "kroyvoys" was treated as a plural noun
(but not as a plural adjective--evidence that it's Yiddish and not
loshnkoydesh?)

I got curious, so I did what any thoroughly lazy researcher does in such
situations:  I asked someone else who knows more about it, in this case
my father.  He said that "kroyvets" is a corruption of "kroyvoys", and he
has also heard them used interchangeably.  (Yes, I was careful not to
load the question.)  He then went and found me lots of info on names for
piyutim (mostly from that gem of a collection, _Oytser Yisroel_).

The _Tishbi_ quotes the acronym which Paul mentioned;  he also says it's
a popular mistake (an early example of folk reanalysis?) and asserts that
it's a corruption of "kroyvoys".  He explains the etymology of "kroyvoys"
as follows:

The piyutim are recited by the khazn;

The khazn is/was formally called up to the 'omud' (similarly to the way
Ashkenazim call up to the bime for aliyes);

The khazn is known as the "koreyv", because he is called up with the
commandment "krov"--'come near';

Since the piyutim are recited by the "koreyv", they are called "kroyvoys".

(A side note on the commandment "krov":  similarly, in the Ashkenazi
nusakh for calling up the first oyle, the gabbai says ". . . koyheyn
krov, ya'amoyd khloyne ben shmeruk hakoyheyn. . .")

[Oytser Yisroel doesn't mention Romance sources at all;  I haven't seen
the Tishbi in the original.]

Oytser Yisroel also quotes another etymology from Avudraham, who says
that "kroyvoys" are named for Rabi Aleksandro Krovo or Kroyvo, who is
mentioned in a medresh as being the author of many of them.

I still have no clue as to why the name "kroyvoys" applies specifically
to the piyut for Purim, or why Purim's piyut should have a special name.

I have never come across the usage of "kroyvets" to refer to a makhzer
(mentioned by Reb Mikhl).  In fact, I have never come across "kroyvets"
except in the phrase "kroyvets/kroyves l'pirem" or in a Purim-related
context.  (I have also never heard the pronunciation "payet" for
"piyet".)

There are also a bunch of other names for specific piyutim:

"Oyfanim" (sing. "oyfn") are piyutim inserted in k'dusha d'sidra (the
middle of the brokhe of "yoytser ham'oyroys") before the words
"vho'Oyfanim v'khayoys hakoydesh" (the connection here should be clear).

("Yoytser" originally referred to a piyut inserted in the first brokhe
before kriyas shma, "yoytser ham'oyroys,' and was subsequesntly applied
to any piyut inserted in shakhris or khazoras ha-sha"ts.  See vols. 5.040
and 5.043.)

A "Zulas" is inserted in the middle of the brokhe after shma ("go'al
yisroel") at the words "ein lonu oyd eloykim zulosekho selo". ('zulas'
plus possessive = 'zulosekho').

A "Seyder" is a piyut which explains something in order, e.g. the "seyder
ho'avoydo" for Yom Kipur, which delineates the Yom Kipur service in the
Beys Hamikdosh.

A "Pizmon" is any piyut which has a chorus or a refrain.  (Supposedly
from a Greek root involving the consonants p,z,m, used in Targum as a
translation for the word "Vaya'an"--'and [he] answered'.)

[There are also other names for piyutim based on their structure, such as
"shniyo", "shlishiyo", and "shalmoynis", but I don't think they were a
part of everyday speech.]

I seem to remember "pizmen" making its way into some Yiddish idioms with
a different meaning, but I can't remember them offhand.  I imagine the
others were occasionally borrowed by Yiddish speakers, but I don't think
they became independent of their original meanings, the way "yoytsres"
and "pizmen" have.  Has anyone come across them outside their direct
reference to piyutim?

My apologies to those for whom this discussion has strayed too far from
Yiddish into loshn hakoydesh.  (Having spent an inordinate amount of
effort trying to make it to those parts of "Ashkenaz" that were just
before and just after Shabbes, and sorely regretting the fact that some
very interesting events were held at times when anyone Orthodox couldn't
be there, I needed quite a bit more to consider it 'even' :-).

Eliyahu Juni

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 5.046

Mendele has 2 rules:

	1. Provide a meaningful Subject: line
	2. Sign your article (full name please)

Send articles to:
    mendele@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

Send change-of-status messages to:
    listserv@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

        a. For a temporary stop: set mendele nomail
        b. To resume delivery: set mendele mail
        c. To subscribe: sub mendele first_name last_name
        d. To unsubscribe kholile: unsub mendele

Other business:
    nmiller@mail.trincoll.edu

              ****Getting back issues****

1. Anonymous ftp archives are available.

ftp ftp.mendele.trincoll.edu
    in the directory pub/mendele/files

    A table of contents is also available, along with weekly updates.

2. Mendele archives can also be reached as follows:

via WWW:
    http://sunsite.unc.edu/yiddish/mewais.html

via gopher:
    gopher://sunsite.unc.edu/11/../.pub/academic/languages/yiddish/mendele

via ftp:
    ftp://sunsite.unc.edu/pub/academic/languages/yiddish/mendele



