
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 5.049
July 11, 1995

1) Children's names in verbal aggression (Zellig Bach)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 10 Jul 1995 23:32:38 -0400
From: zellig@aol.com
Subject: Children's names in verbal aggression

Jewish children _ in der alter heym_ (in the old country) did not talk
back to their parents.  This would have been unheard of, unimaginable, a
clear transgression of the fifth of the Ten Commandments -- "Honour thy
father and thy mother."

The children's only outlet to give vent to verbal aggression was by using
the name of a child in a mocking, hurting, teasing way.

If a child came home crying because he was called "names,"  all a mother
could do was to console her daughter, or son, with basically the same
advice offered in the old English rhyme "sticks and stones/ may break
your bones/ but words could never hurt me."

Some of the verbal-aggression samples I bring below I remember from my
childhood in the second decade of this century in Vilne (then Russia).

I remember a girl named Beylke, the diminutive of Beyle.  She was a pale
and probably oversensitive child, ready to cry if she lost a game, or
when teased by other girls for some reason (or for no reason) .  They
would add to her discomfort by saying "Beylke, host dayn fatsheylke?" (do
you have your handkerchief?), that is, do you have your hanky ready to
wipe your eyes. ("Fatsheyle" in Yiddish means a shawl or kerchief, but
its diminutive "fatsheylke," a small square white cloth, was used in
Lithuanian Yiddish for handkerchief.)

A young girl named Mal'ke (Hebrew-Yiddish for queen, the feminine of
Mylekh, king) was often harassed by the premature, untimely question
"Ma'le, Ma'le, ven verstu a ka'le? (when are you going to become a
bride?).  Note the shift from Ma'lke to Ma'le [see Postscript].

If a boy tried to change the rules in the middle of a game, or otherwise
gain an improper advantage over his peers, they would tell him off by
saying "Zay nit kayn Meyer der dreyer (don't be a Meyer the finagler)
even if his name was not Meyer.)

Both rhyming, as seen in the three examples above, as well as clang
(sound) asociations, were characteristic features of much name-calling
among children.

Pairing of names, especially if they rhymed, was a frequent device.  If
two boys were always seen together, and in games that called for partners
routinely sought such positions, they would be called "Be'rl un Shme'rl"
(not their actual names).  The pairing of these names is also found in
the folk song "Be'rl mitn fidle, Shmerl mitn bas (Be'rl with his fiddle,
Shme'rl with his bass).

Several of the following examples were culled from an article by Khayim
Sheshkin:*

A boy named AvrEml (the dinimutive of Avrohom, also pronounced Avrom) was
frequently heckled by other boys with the question "AvrEml, vos hostu in
dayn kreml?" (what do you have in your /little/ store? [a euphemism for
pants], or "AvrEml, farmakh dayn kerml" (close your shop), even if all
buttons were properly done and in place.  (This was in the era B.Z. --
before zippers.)

If a girl was called So'rke, diminutive of So're, she would occasionally
be cursed by other girls "Sore, So're ver a kapo're" (become a scapegoat
punished for someone else's sins.

Note the shift from the diminutive to the adult form of the name for the
sake of the rhyme.

Nonsense names were often invented for rhyming, strictly for the purpose
of teasing and annoying.  Thus, a girl named Riv'ke was made fun of by
being called Riv'ke-Piv'ke.  Similarly, a boy named Kiv'ke, diminutive of
Aki've, might be pestered by Kiv'ke-Piv'ke.  [See Postscript.]

And a boy named Shi'men, who in the eyes of his peers behaved improperly,
might be told that when he gets home he will see the "rimen" (rhyme),
that is his father will assuredly give him a deserved spanking with a
strap.

In the blurred haze of nostalgia Jewish children are often portrayed as
innocent malOkhimlekh  (little angels), as the Mey'shelekh and
Shley'melekh playing "Under di Grininke Beymelekh" (under the green
little trees), as perpetuated by the great Hebrew poet Byalik in his
wonderful, delightful poem he originally wrote in Yiddish.  The reality,
however, tells us a different story: They were normal children, with all
kinds of feelings, including feelings of anger and aggression, but
essentially verbal, playful aggression, with only a rare instance of
rudeness and a very, very mild hint of barely discernible obscenity.
Otherwise their verbal aggression was properly tamed and channeled.

Postscript:  Since the second syllables in Mal'ke and Riv'ke (the
Hebrew-Yiddish kof-hey and, respectively, kuf-hey) sound exactly like the
Yiddish diminutive  "-ke" (kuf-ayen) -- familiar to children from their
own names  Hirshke, Motke, Leyke, Minke, Tsipke, and so on -- adults
feared that children, upon hearing an adult, grown-up woman called Mal'ke
or Riv'ke, with the Yiddish-sounding diminutive "ke," might erroneously
perceive it as a sign of disrespect or insult.  Imagine calling a
grown-up adult woman as if she were still only a young child!   The
adults therefore invented *back formations* from the Yiddish-diminutive-
sounding  Mal'ke and Riv'ke and coined the *augmentative* names Ma'le and
Ri've  to obviate children's confusion or misperception.

Zellig Bach
Lakehurst, NJ

_________________________________________________
* "Nemen in farsheydene oysdrukn un vertlekh" (Names in Various
Expressions and Sayings), _di yidishe shprakh_, Vol. XX, No. 3, pp. 94 -
100, YIVO Institute for Jewish Research, N.Y. (1960).

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 5.049

Mendele has 2 rules:

	1. Provide a meaningful Subject: line
	2. Sign your article (full name please)

Send articles to:
    mendele@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

Send change-of-status messages to:
    listserv@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

        a. For a temporary stop: set mendele nomail
        b. To resume delivery: set mendele mail
        c. To subscribe: sub mendele first_name last_name
        d. To unsubscribe kholile: unsub mendele

Other business:
    nmiller@mail.trincoll.edu

              ****Getting back issues****

1. Anonymous ftp archives are available.

ftp ftp.mendele.trincoll.edu
    in the directory pub/mendele/files

    A table of contents is also available, along with weekly updates.

2. Mendele archives can also be reached as follows:

via WWW:
    http://sunsite.unc.edu/yiddish/mewais.html

via gopher:
    gopher://sunsite.unc.edu/11/../.pub/academic/languages/yiddish/mendele

via ftp:
    ftp://sunsite.unc.edu/pub/academic/languages/yiddish/mendele



