
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 6.165
December 26, 1996

1) Slavic influences on Yiddish syntax (Ellen Prince)
2) Slavic influences on Yiddish syntax (Joachim Neugroschel)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 25 Dec 1996 13:13:29 EST
From: ellen@central.cis.upenn.edu
Subject: Slavic influences on Yiddish syntax

arnie kuzmack (6.164) asks why the following aren't examples of
slavic influence on yiddish syntax:

1.  The use of zikh for first and second persons as well as third.

2.  The near disappearance of perfect tenses in Yiddish.

re _zikh_, i would count that as a lexical or morphological influence.
think of 'syntax' as the constraints on the particular order and
configuration of *word classes*. the actual words that those word
classes are realized by would be matters of the *lexicon* or the
*morphology*, not the syntax.

re the 'near disappearance of perfect tenses', i must be missing
something as i'm stumped as to why that would be a slavic influence at
*any* level -- slavic (at least russian) in fact expresses past time by
a perfect/preterite tense (_on znal/skazal_ 'he knew/said'). what
exactly did you have in mind? is it perhaps the case that polish or
ukrainian uses a present perfect to express past time?

what i do believe *is* a slavic influence with respect to tense is the
change from the germanic 'sequence of tense' system, where the time of
speaking remains the reference point for all the tenses in the sentence,
to the slavic type, where the time of each clause becomes the reference
point for the time of the clauses embedded in it, e.g.

   english/old yiddish: he said he WAS sick (at time of his speaking)
			he said he HAD BEEN sick (before speaking)

			he said on sunday that he WOULD COME yesterday.

   modern yiddish/slavic: er hot gezogt az er IZ krank (at time of
				speaking)
			 er hot gezogt az er IZ GEVEN krank (before
				speaking)

			 zuntik hot er gezogt az er VET KUMEN nekhtn.

this change i would consider *semantic* -- the *germanic forms* remained
but lost their *germanic meanings* and came to be associated instead
with *slavic meanings*.

now, i do believe that there is a slavic-inspired change in *form* of
the yiddish pluperfect, the one that gives us the invariant _gehat_ in
what's left of the pluperfect (e.g. _er iz GEHAT avekgegangen_, from an
earlier _er iz GEVEN avekgegangen_) -- i suspect this was brought about
by the sharp drop in frequency of pluperfects after the above semantic
change -- so the kid didn't hear enough pluperfects to figure out the
'right' analysis. but this, if true, would be a very indirect influence
and does not result in a slavic *form* in yiddish.

ellen prince

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 25 Dec 1996 14:04:12 -0500 (EST)
From: achim1@cris.com
Subject: Slavic influences on Yiddish syntax

In regard to the question of Slavic influences on Yiddish syntax, Arnie
Kuzmack (6,164) posits two possibilities:

1.  The extension of the reflexive pronoun "zikh" to all persons
singular and plural (and, I might add, to both the dative and the
accusative).

2.  The alleged loss of the German "perfect" tense.

On the basis of linguistic evidence, I would have to disagree with both
notions.

in regard to the first idea, the extension of "zikh" is an issue in the
lexicon, not in the syntax, since this replacement of the other set of
reflexive prounouns (mikh/mir;  dikh/dir, etc.) altered only the word,
but not the word order.  "Ikh dermon zikh, ikh dermon mikh"--either way,
the reflexive pronoun is in the same position.

Furthermore, the extension process actually began in German (although
the Slavic surroundings may have further encouraged it in Yiddish):
contrary to earlier stages of German, late medieval German began
exclusively using "sich" in the third person--both singular and plural,
both dative and accusative (but not genitive).  That is still the
situation in modern German, which retains the older reflexive pronouns
in the first and second persons, singular and plural, dative and
accusative.

As for the Yiddish extension of "zikh" to all persons and cases and to
both numbers, we'd have to pinpoint whether it already existed in
Western Yiddish before eastward migration.  If the extension originated
in Eastern Europe, then, as I have said, the Slavic influence _may_ have
encouraged a development that actually originated in medieval German.

In regard to the second idea, the alleged "loss of perfect tenses":
German has no perfect(ive) or imperfect(ive) tenses--nor has it ever had
any.  The preterite ("Ich ging" = I went) may be misnomered
"Perfektiv(um)" (a misleading term from Latin and French grammar), but
its function is both perfect and imperfect--like all other German
tenses. The preterite pretty much vanished from spoken High German (and
by then from Yiddish) by the 1450s.  It then re-entered High German when
Low German speakers took over the High German literary tongue and
(re)introduced the preterite, as a bookish hypercorrection, into spoken
German. Today, even highly educated south German speakers (including
Austrians and Swiss) use only the composed past in their speech ("Ich
bin gegangen"= I have gone, I went), and sometimes misuse these two past
tenses in their writings, partly through hypercorrections (check, for
instance the diaries of Swiss playwright Max Frisch).

Since perfective Slavic tenses have one-word forms (Russian:  "Ya
napisal" + "I wrote") the Slavic influence might have actually
_encouraged_ the retention of a "one-word Yiddish tense"--but it didn't.

The issue of "aspects"--i.e. perfective, imperfective--in Yiddish is
very intricate and may point to a _semantic_ but not a _syntactical_
source in Slavic.  However, even this development began in German and is
still prevalent today:  "Ich komme" = "I come";  "Ich komme an" = "I
arrive".  The Yiddish "aspects", which include many such prefixed verbs,
can differ from German equivalents--but then they also differ widely
from Slavic equivalents--which may, however, have given Yiddish speakers
a different kind of sensitivity to aspects.  Whatever use they may have
in Yiddish does not quite overlap with their use in medieval German or
in the Slavic languages.

One final note about the loss of one-word tenses:  Middle High German
formed a pluperfect by adding the prefix "ge-" to the preterite: "Ich
sanc" = "I sang"; "ich gesanc" = "I had sung."  This tense did not make
it into modern German or into Yiddish, although both languages still
affix a "ge-" to certain past participles.

In my translation of Kafka's _Metamorphosis and Other Stories_
(Scribner's, also out in paperback), I discuss the problems of
translating tenses, which are intertwined with syntax in very specific
narrative modes.

Joachim Neugroschel

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 6.165

