
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 5.176
November 26, 1995

1) Tkhinos-taytsh (Bernie Greenberg)
2) Got fun Avrom (David Herskovic)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 23 Nov 1995 22:12:47 -0500
From: bsg@basistech.com
Subject: Tkhinos-taytsh

I just found an heirloom, in books from my mother (who has less use for
it than I), a little blue hardbound Hebrew Publishing Company volume
(reprinted from 1916) entitled "Rav Pninim" (I can't find the name of an
editor or anthologizer), containing a large number of prayers arranged
by liturgical cycle, some in Hebrew, but the majority in a _very_
_Daitshmerisher-Yiddish written with vowel-points througout, e.g., this
_Miserere_ for _Yom-Kippur_:

  Fargieb mir mayn foter, wos du bist a bal harakhamim, oyf di ale
  chatoim wavonos ufshoim, was ikh hob gezindigt far dir un hob dir
  dertzehrent...

The "fargieb" actually has an 'ayin between the jod and the beth, often
old German spellings like "thun" (teth-he-waw-nun) appear, etc., as well
as words like "foter" (Vater) for which I would have expected "tate",
etc., left and right.

Harkavy, under "tkhinos" (which all these prayers are called) lists this
as "prayers, esp. for women", and mentions something called
"tkhinos-taytsh", the title page of my volume says, "in ivri taytsh".

What is going on here?  Is anyone familiar with this volume, or this
apparent tradition of highly-Germanized Yiddish, or Judaeized German, or
whatever it is, as a vehicle for prayerbooks for women?

Bernie Greenberg

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: 25 Nov 95 20:11:52 EST
From: 100114.750@compuserve.com
Subject: G-t fin avrohom

'G-t fun Avrohom' is a popular tkhine (supplication) to be said on shpays
tsi nakhts (motse shabes). It is traditionally attributed to Reb Layvi
Yitskhok of Berdichev.

The Rebbe of Berdichev (1740-1810), more fondly known as the
Barditchever, was one of the early Rabbis of the Chasidic movement. He is
primarily renown as a maylits yoysher (intercessor, mitigator) on behalf
of his people. He did this in a very simple and folksy style. He would
according to legend have din toyres (Court Cases) with G-d pleading that
the plight of His people is unjustified and unwarranted. There are
various yidish songs and stories around his 'deals' with the Almighty. I.
L. Peretz also uses him in his stories.

I say according to legend because his main work, the sayfer 'Kedishas
Layvi', a Chasidic commentary on Torah does not have any more melitsas
yoysher than the works of his contemporaries or any other Chasidic
seforim.

Coming back to the tekhine of 'G-t fun Avrohom', it is not written in his
seforim but was reputedly found between his papers after his death. Its
popularity is probably due a lot to his popular character though it is
also short and simple.

Though it was written to be said for all it is mostly only recited by
women. There are some who believe it to be a substitute for the
benediction that must be said in order to carry out any of the actions
prohibited during the shabes.

I would contend that the many variations on the heading 'G-t fin avrohom'
are compositions by others riding on the popularity of the liturgy and
its title. The version cited by Chana Mlotek (Vol. 5.174) seems to be a
pastiche of a few words from this one in rhyme, with some lines belonging
to the song 'shnirele perele'. I very much doubt the barditchever wrote
poems and gramen.

There are however various versions of the one here with slight
differences but all in a similar gist. Intrestingly, the korben minkhe
sider which should be an authority on things like this has a shortened
version in a single paragraph.

The words said to be found in his writings are the title 'A great sgile
for success'. It goes on 'This request is to be said three times by all
men, women and children every week at the termination of the holy Shabes
in ikh bin farzikhert az zay velen im yirtse hashem begliken' (and I am
sure that they will, subject to G-d's will, be successful). This last
passage is also recited by some.

G-t fin avrohom in fin yitskhok in fin yakoyv! behit dan lib folk yiroayl
fin alem bayzen in danem loyb az der liber shabes koydesh gayt. az di
vokh in der khoydesh in der yor zolen ints tsi kimen tsi emine shlayme,
tsi eminas khakhomim, tsi ahaves khavayrim, tsi devaykes haboyre borikh
hi. mamin tsi zan bishloysh esray ikrim shelokh, ivigeile kroyve bimhayro
beyomayni, ivitkhiyas hamaysim, ivinvias moyshe rabayni olov hasoloym.

riboynoy shel oylom! di bist dokh hanoysayn layoayf koyakh, gib dane libe
yidishe kinderlekh oykh koyekh dikh tsi loyben in nor dikh tsi dinen in
kayn andren kholile nisht. in az di vokh in der khoydesh in der yor zol
ints kimen tsi gezint in tsi mazel, in tsi brokhe v'hatslokhe, in tsi
kheysed, in tsi bone, khaye arikhe imzoyne revikhe v'siyate dishmaye,
loni ilekhol yisroayl. omayn.

G-d of Abraham, Issac and Jacob! Guard Your people Israel from all fury
in Your praise at the going of the cherished holy shabes. That this week
and this month and this year should bring us to complete faith; to belief
in the sages; to the loving of friends; to attachment to the Creator
Blessed is He. To have faith in your thirteen tenets; and in the
forthcoming redemption, speedy in our days; and in the resurrection of
the dead; and in the prophecy of Moses our Rabbi, may peace be on him.

Governor of the Universe! You are He who gives strength to the weak, also
give Your cherished yidishe kinderlekh strength to praise You and to
worship only You and not, forbid, anybody else. And that this week and
this month and this year should bring us to health and to mazel, to
blessings and success, and to kindness, and to children, long life and an
abundance of sustenance, and heavenly assistance to us and to all of
Israel. Amen.

a gite vokh

David Herskovic

PS Please excuse my amateurish translation.

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 5.176

Mendele has 2 rules:

	1. Provide a meaningful Subject: line
	2. Sign your article (full name please)

Send articles to:
    mendele@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

Send change-of-status messages to:
    listserv@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

        a. For a temporary stop: set mendele nomail
        b. To resume delivery: set mendele mail
        c. To subscribe: sub mendele first_name last_name
        d. To unsubscribe kholile: unsub mendele

Other business:
    nmiller@mail.trincoll.edu

              ****Getting back issues****

1. Anonymous ftp archives are available.

ftp ftp.mendele.trincoll.edu
    in the directory pub/mendele/files

    A table of contents is also available, along with weekly updates.

2. Mendele archives can also be reached as follows:

via WWW:
    http://sunsite.unc.edu/yiddish/mewais.html

via gopher:
    gopher://sunsite.unc.edu/11/../.pub/academic/languages/yiddish/mendele

via ftp:
    ftp://sunsite.unc.edu/pub/academic/languages/yiddish/mendele



