
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 3.232
February 13, 1994

1) Various (Mikhl Herzog)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sat Feb 12 18:12:14 1994
From: ZOGUR@CUVMB.CC.COLUMBIA.EDU
Subject: Various

Subjects:

1. Yiddish and Genetics!! 2. Judezmo and Genetics; gene flow.
3. Yiddish and Thieves' Cant. 4. Shmontses 5. Judeo-Greek
6. History of Yiddish 7. Etc.

Reb Noyekh,

I'd like to appeal your recent ban on the fascinating discussion of
Jewish history, genetics, etc. My reference to "Yiddish and
genetics" is not simply a case of "elephants and the Jewish problem"
(Is that still an easily understood expression?). It's REAL!!

[What can a shames answer?  The kherem is lifted. nm]

Let me report on matters of some interest (if only of limited
significance).

1. YIDDISH AND GENETICS. In the mid 1960's, Time Magazine ran a
piece on the presumed cause of the Tay-Sachs disease mutation some
time in the middle ages. It was my first encounter with the matter,
but it coincidentally (?) it was followed almost immediately (or,
perhaps, preceded) by another: a telephone call from one, Dr.
Stanley Aronson, of downstate Medical College in NYC who had
encountered a telephone listing for the "Language and Culture Atlas
of Ashkenazic Jewry". made to order, right? ATLAS and ASHKENAZIC
JEWRY.

Uriel Weinreich and I subsequently met with Drs. Aronson and others
whom some of will recognize as prominent geneticists: Ntinos
Myrianthopolous of NIH, Victor McCusick, Peter Brunt, engagedin a
study of T-S and other "Ashkenazic Jewish" hereditary diseases of
the central nervous system.

Atlas, they said. Could we a) identify the places of origin of the
generally immigrant grandparents of T-S children? b) Could we help
determine whether the geographic distribution of the birthplaces of
T-S ancestors reflected the geographic distribution of origins of
the American Jewish community in general, or was it rather skewed
with respect to it?

I should say, in general, that it was my distinct impression that
the very act of posing the questions this way (and the effort
engendered thereby) had previously been considered taboo, and were
something of a breakthrough, breached the constraints of political
correctness that they believed had impeded earlier research on this
and other hereditary diseases by precluding questions of race and
ethnicity.

In any event we encountered considerable difficulty in interpreting
the available data. Suffice it to say that an answer to question b)
was beyond our ken; on the other hand, a) yielded interesting
results.

We plotted the geographic origins of the European ancestors of a
number of related syndromes (all heavily Ashkenazic: Tay-Sachs,
Niemann-Pick, Reilly-Day).  For the naive, like me, it was a miracle
that any of us had escaped unscathed; more interesting: when the
birthplaces of the relevant ancestors was plotted on the map of
Central and Eastern Europe, lo and behold, the the diseases
themselves were largely in geographically complementary
distribution; furthermore, the concentration of occurrences were
such that the lines that appeared to mark the significant geographic
limits of each of the diseases with respect to the others seemed
uncannily, but NOT surprisingly, to resemble the borders that
delimit the traditionally defined language and culture boundaries as
determined from our study of Yiddish dialect data alone. I'm NOT
qualified to talk about statistical significance of correlations,
but my "khush" tells me that the correlations that did emerge were
not due to chance.

Somewhere, I may still have access to the slides that accompanied
our presentation to  the American Neurological Association
("Proceedings", 1967: 117-121). An attempt to suggest some of the
significance of these correlations is incorporated in my aricle in
"Genetic Diseases Among Ashkenazi Jews" (ed by Richard M. goodman
and Arno Motulsky), 1979: 47-57.

As an aside, I should add that I expect Dr. Reuben Matalon of the
Research Institute at Miami's Children's Hospital to provide me with
demographic data for Canavan Disease so that we may continue this
effort.

2. JUDEZMO AND GENETICS. During the summer of 1967, I was a member
of an anthropological research team in Aruba (The joke was no joke
then. "Aruba? Where's that? I don't know, I flew.") I spent six
weeks "exploring the possibilities for research in the Netherlands
Antilles (Aruba, Bonnaire, Curacao)," something I was not able to
follow up, thereafter.

Among other things, I wondered if it might be possible to retrieve
Sefardic or Converso influences in Papiamentu, the Spanish based
Creole of the ABC islands. Encounters with people from Surinam
suggested that similar questions might be asked about Taki-Taki, the
English based Creole of that country.

Nothing came of these issues but, I returned to NYC much wiser about
a number of other things. The "herem d'rabeynu gershom" that banned
polygamy among Ashkenazim, did not apply in that society. Monogamy,
perhaps, yes but explicitly accompanied by widespread concubinage
practised both by the Jews and by the Dutch. The difference between
them was apparently the fact that the Jews gave their names (more or
less) to the (often considerable number of) non-Jewish  children of
their concubines and, often, took responsibility for their
education. The Dutch were said not to have done so.

Keep in mind that this was (is?) Dutch territory; order and record
keeping was the rule. Every inhabitant, "white, olive- skinned, and
black) had a carefully kept ID car which recorded a long
geneological record. A number of us visited a family in the "Cunuco"
(the backwoods). Mother (Indian squaw-looking), father, many
children and grandchildren (people "of color"), seated or standing
around a large living room, bedecked with every kind of Catholic
icon. Family name? Maduro, one of the most frequent family names on
the island. Familiar? Well, the Jewish branch of the family, the
Levi-Maduros has/had? its seat on Curacao. (Amsterdam's "Madurodam"
is their doing".) Through an interpreter, the parents related to us
that in earlier years, when their children were growing up,
neighbors would often prevent their own children from playing with
"those Jewish Maduros". (Funny you don't look Jewish).

In any event, this is clearly an instance of considerable gene
outflow.

3. THIEVES' CANT. Martin Luther, no friend of the Jews under the
best of circumstances, asserted that Jews constituted a significant
component of the German underworld. True or not, Jewish social
contacts in Germany were more likely to have been with the lower
classes than with the knightly court, and there is considerable
linguistic evidence to support this, not the least of which is the
underworld. Whether introduced by Jews or simply borrowed from them,
it's no surprise that the non-German component of Jewish speech
could serve for cryptic purposes, particularly, but not exclusively
in a German-speaking environment. Hence, the many Hebrew-origin
words in thieves' cant--Rotwelsch (and in the German vernacular) to
which dictionaries are devoted. Hence (probably) the interest in
Yiddish of the former police chief of Luebeck, Ave-Lallement, whose
4 volume 18th century work "Das deutsche Gaunertum" devotes one and
one-half friendly, significant volumes to a grammar, chrestomathy,
dictionary of Yiddish.

I need only add that there appears to be a universal aspect to
thieves' cant and its possible relationship to Yiddish, as reported,
for example, by people studying the lingo of the British underworld.
Then there's Mencken, no?

4. SHMONTSES. Possibly another example of the nasalization of ayin;
related to "shmues". Don't hold me to it.

5. JUDEO-GREEK. Kalmen Weisser: i) See also, Paul Wexler on pre-
Ashkenazic jewish settlements in "From Shtetl to Socialism: Studies
from Polin" ed. by Antony Polansky, London and Washington, 1993. ii)
As Zachary Baker, YIVO librarian (on this network, too) if he can
provide you with the address (in England, I believe) for Brad Sabin
Hill, who is still sitting on a treasure which he himsel compiled
some years ago; probably the most (only?) comprehensive bibliography
of Judeo-Greek in existence. He should be urged to publish it.

6. HISTORY OF YIDDISH. a) Bob King: I would join in the plea that
you take the time to elucidate some of the things you've published
elsewhere. My own question to you would be to list those significant
features which you find that Yiddish shares with Bavarian German
that are exclusive to  Bavarian German, that might not also be
features of the German Southwest.

b) For those engaged in the fascinating discussions of recent weeks,
I must confess to some confusion. I find some of the categories
we`ve been discussing somewhat elusive. These are not rhetorical
questions and I address them to anyone who cares to respond:

-Do "Eastern European Jews" constitute a different category from
"Jews in Eastern Europe"? -How does one or the other correspond to
"Ashkenazic Jews"? -Where do "German Jews" fit into the picture?
-Can Ashkenazic Jewish population growth in medieval Europe be
explained without invoking either a significant pre-existing Jewish
population, culturally submerged by their eastward moving brethren
or, significant conversion?

If it`s of interest: Except for its occurrence in the Bible
(referent unknown), the term Ashkenaz probably appears for the first
time in Europe as a designation for Jewish merchants from the East
(Armenia?) who moved westward and gave their name to the western
Jews among whom they settled? As for why it was then applied to
Germany, blaybt a kashe! There's no lack of "cockamamie"
unconvincing theories for that one.

7. ETC. Two questions under this heading: a) Is there a native or
near-native Yiddish speaker in the College Park/DC area who would be
interested in tutoring an advanced graduate student? If yes, please
make yourself known on Mendele or directly to me.

For what it's all worth. I guess I've got to stop. Sorry to have
gone on so long.

Mikhl Herzog

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 3.232

To subscribe, send SUB MENDELE FIRSTNAME LASTNAME to:

                   LISTSERV@YALEVM.YCC.YALE.EDU

Mendele has 2 rules:

	1. Provide a Subject: line.
	2. Sign your article.

Send submissions/responses to:
        mendele@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

Other business:
        nmiller@starbase.trincoll.edu

Anonymous ftp archives available on:
        ftp.mendele.trincoll.edu
        in the directory pub/mendele/files

