
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 5.081
August 11, 1995

1) Interview with Josef Levinson -- translation (Andrew Cassel)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 8 Aug 1995 21:33:10 -0400
From: cassel@libertynet.org
Subject: Interview with Josef Levinson -- translation

In Mendele 5.072 I posted excerpts of an interview with Josef Levinson,
editor of "Yerushalyim d'Lita" in Vilna. Here is a translation. (Thanks,
by the way, to Mark Alsher and Paul Pascal for making this possible,
although I reserve credit for all translation and transliteration
errors...):

AC -- I would like to hear more about the Jewish community here, and what
happened during the time of "perestroika"...

JL -- So, the collapse of the Soviet system began in the period of
perestroika. Before the period of perestroika began, all the republics
were directly subservient to Moscow. The other republics began a
movement, a national movement, a drive to become independent. This is a
thing which is understandable; every people want to be its own master.
So, this became so to speak a popular phrase. However, the problem with
those who I have recently called ... from that side this was not such a
simple thing. Control wasn't easy to let go of, but in the last analysis,
it was not a difficult time. The general international situation, the
support from a whole line of western governments which supported the
drive for independence, for national independence. So in the last
analysis a lot can be said about that but at the end there were set up
independent states, the Baltics and others. And with the beginning of the
national revival, of the process of the national revival here of the
Lithuanians the great majority of inhabitants, there also began a
national revival of the minorities, among them the Jews ...

AC -- And how did you start the newspaper?

JL -- The newspaper was more or less founded in '89, just as Jewish
social and cultural life was starting its revival. There were already
established Jewish institutions, Jewish organizations -- you understand
that it couldn't be compared with those which were formerly in Vilna.
From Vilna where there had lived 70,000 Jews, there remained now, I
think, at that time, in '89 there were probably 7,000, 8,000. And only a
smaller number were native Jews, local Jews. The rest had all come from
Russia. Understand? There is also a difference. They don't know -- it's
not their fault -- but their condition was such that they  were not able
to know any Yiddish, had no knowlege of Jewish history, of Jewish
literature, about Jewish culture, and so on...

At that time, at the beginning of the revival of Jewish social and
cultural life ...  various Jewish organizations were established. A
Jewish state museum, a Jewish national school ... a Jewish kindergarten
... yes, yes, they all are functioning now. A department of Judaica at
the state library where there are thousands, maybe ten thousand different
Jewish books, which are attracting a growing interest. They all were
collected in the German time, collected in order to be destroyed, only
they were found by a noble man, a Lithuania who took them when the
Germans left and saw they survived through the Soviet period, so they
shouldn't be destroyed here. Because in the Soviet time they did that
also, they did everything to eradicate Jewish things.

So, just like with all the institutions then were established different
social organizations, Jewish women's organizations, WIZO (Women's
International Zionist Org., aka Hadassah) for example - - we have a
chapter of WIZO here. There is Maccabee, there is Betar, various
organizations which organize singing, dancing -- a whole array. They have
quite an interesting program.

So, during  that time, when everything was being put together, one of our
most important causes was to have a newspaper. A newspaper should
represent Jewish society, speak out about its interests and aspirations;
it should describe, and mirror Jewish life in Lithuania and elsewhere.

There were, at one time, four or five Yiddish daily newspapers, two
evening newspapers ... there was the "Yiddishe Shtime" (Jewish Voice)
"Folksblat", "Moment", "Dos Vort," others...

AC-- In Vilna or in Kovno?

JL - I'm speaking of Kovno. There was "Ovnt Blat" there was "Daily News"
These were afternoon newspapers. In Vilna also, but I was living in
Kovno. I can't list all the Vilna newspapers for you, but the situation
was similar. But many more Jews lived in Vilna than in Kovno, and here
there was such an effervescence, you might say, to Jewish social and
cultural life. When I came for the first time to Vilna in 1940, it was
like I had fallen into truly an exclusively Jewish city. Especially in
the center, the daily streets where most of the Jews lived, it had the
outward appearance of an Eastern city, of an Eastern people with such
tumult, such noise, it was really a Jewish city, a Jewish city.

So, the newspapers were of this kind that I've described to you; they
were our representation, I'll say our flag. Like a flag for Jewish
society. Like on a ship -- when the ship is sailing, they hang the flag.
As long as the flag flies, you can say the ship is sailing, everything's
OK.  ...

So, this newspaper existed until a year ago in April. In April some
unfortunate things happened, not only with the newspaper -- there was
founded a Lithuanian stock company, ostensibly to make a profit, to try
to earn it by putting out the newspaper; they thought that they could
keep expenses under the revenues ... for a time they published it, but
then the business got worse and a year ago it went bankrupt, so
eventually they closed the Jewish newspaper.

For a while we looked for a way, but the problems were very large.
Attempts were made to put out a Jewish newspaper, there was no newspaper
here, only a Russian newspaper, "Ekho Litui" A Russian newspaper. Since
there were a lot of Jews who speak Russian ...

[Here he described the difficulties involved with starting up the
newspaper again..]

JL -- Our financial possibilities are very limited. If we don't have any
support, the first "if"; if our readership does not increase we will not
be able to keep going very long ... financially we are very weak...

Here let us say such a newspaper should be sold for 50 cents -- that is
already a lot, because a newspaper of about 20 pages costs 80 cents, and
here our paper is four pages. So for us to sell one issue for 50 cents is
already a lot. You understand? Our circulation cannot grow. The number of
newspapers we can distribute among the Jews here is very limited. Because
Jews here are few, and we cannot cover the expenses of publishing the
newspaper unless the circulation is larger. For the rest we are dependent
on help that we can obtain on the side, from sponsors ... we depend
entirely on getting readers abroad.

We set the price, I don't know how this is for you, at $50 a year for the
newspaper. That is perhaps no small price ... What do you think? Is that
a lot for 12 issues a year?

AC -- That is not cheap, but ..

JL -- Not very expensive.

AC -- Not very expensive for some people. For some, such as students,
it's expensive. However, if you produce a newspaper with a lot of
interesting articles, in Yiddish and in English ...

JL -- It's also published in English .. So, if you will help us with
circulation... in America, let's say, if we could find 500 readers, we'd
be "all right."

AC -- I don't know if you can find 500 readers. I don't know.

JL-- I understand. But I'm telling you what the problem is. If we had 500
readers in America, we'd get by. It would be satisfactory.

AC -- I think in America there are 500, 1,000, more -- a lot of small
Yiddish reading clubs, Yiddish classes, etc...

JL -- They'd all be interested. Our current issue, the third one, is very
interesting. In the third issue, what do we have ... there will be ...
there was a conference about Yiddish. That was organized by the European
parlimentary council. In the current issue there  will be a big article
by professor Katz, from England, a big article about the history of the
development of Yiddish. Also, there will be some material about the
deportations that took place in 1941, before the war. Because when the
Soviets deported people then to Siberia; among those who were deported
were many Jews. That will be written up. Also, there's news about the
international musical festival we had here. The next issue after this,
which is being prepared, there will be a big page dedicated to Yitzak
Leyb Peretz, because it's the 80th anniversary of Peretz' death.

AC -- He wasn't a Litvak.

JL -- Not from Lithuania, but he is a classic, a classic of Yiddish
literature. To mark the date there will be a whole page with his
biography. We'll have his picture. It will be very intresting, there will
be very interesting description printed ... Now, what other questions do
you have?

AC -- I would like to know what you think about the future of the community
here. I have heard that many people are going to Israel ...

J.L -- This is a question which I think no one can answer categorically,
no one can say for sure. There is a process going on, a process with
certain tendencies. One of the tendencies has to do with how Jews in
different circumstances understand themselves.

Those who want to be, for once, amid people just like themselves, to be
surrounded by Jews, those people are going to Israel. However, there are
people here, you understand -- first of all not everyone is in such a
situation that they can uproot themselves. It's not such a simple thing
as moving from Vilna to Kovno. You have to sit and think about how you
will make your future. Not everyone feels strong enough to take up new
circumstances.

You have to consider, first, if you can master a new language; second,
can you obtain work. Let's talk about doctors for example. Not everyone
here is a doctor, but for example can one just go there and get work? And
there are people here of such an age -- like me for instance -- as they
say, a tree must be transplanted young if it's going to grow in a new
place. To transplant an old tree, that's questionable. You can't always
start over and grow again. Consequently, you understad, the number grows
smaller,  The number of Jews continually grows smaller.

How long there will be Jews here, I can't begin to say, but as long as
there are Jews here, as long as any Jews remain here ... those who leave,
the community can't be concerned with them. Whether we can exist five
years, whether there will be a Jewish community here in five years, ten
years, fifteen years, that's hard to say. I think no one can forecast,
although the tendency, as I said, is that we're growing fewer and fewer.
Mainly they are going to Israel, some others go to America, to Germany
also. But we're not concerned with them, you understand.

But we have to do everything we can to ensure that the Jews who do live
here can live out their lives as Jews. How possible this is in general,
how capable we are of doing this -- that is a very relative concept, the
idea of living one's life as a Jew. We can have daily Jewish concerts. We
can have daily Jewish theater. We can have Jewish lectures here. We can
have thousands of Jewish things which a Jew could experience in his own
language. Ideally, we can provide something to hopefully support his
Jewishness; to help him, so to speak, keep up his Jewish identity. This
is what we must strive for.

How successful we will be, that is hard to say. But we must, for our
part, do everything we can so that the few Jews who do still remain here
should not assimilate, but should remain and endure as Jews.  I maintain
that this is an aim which is worthwhile. Understand? This is a goal worth
suffering for.

----------------------------------------
Andrew Cassel
Elkins Park, PA

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 5.081

Mendele has 2 rules:

	1. Provide a meaningful Subject: line
	2. Sign your article (full name please)

Send articles to:
    mendele@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

Send change-of-status messages to:
    listserv@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

        a. For a temporary stop: set mendele nomail
        b. To resume delivery: set mendele mail
        c. To subscribe: sub mendele first_name last_name
        d. To unsubscribe kholile: unsub mendele

Other business:
    nmiller@mail.trincoll.edu

              ****Getting back issues****

1. Anonymous ftp archives are available.

ftp ftp.mendele.trincoll.edu
    in the directory pub/mendele/files

    A table of contents is also available, along with weekly updates.

2. Mendele archives can also be reached as follows:

via WWW:
    http://sunsite.unc.edu/yiddish/mewais.html

via gopher:
    gopher://sunsite.unc.edu/11/../.pub/academic/languages/yiddish/mendele

via ftp:
    ftp://sunsite.unc.edu/pub/academic/languages/yiddish/mendele



