
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 5.279
March 12, 1996

1) Sholem-Aleykhem's _Kenig Pik_ (Endnotes I) (Leonard Prager)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 13 Feb 96 21:42:39 IST
From: rhle302@uvm.haifa.ac.il
Subject: Sholem-Aleykhem's _Kenig Pik_

                              Endnotes

1. An early version of this paper was presented at the Eighth World Congress
of Jewish Studies in Jerusalem on August 19, 1981.  An expanded version
appeared in _Jewish Language Review_ 2 (1982), 7-20.  The present version is a
revision of the latter.  I thank Aharon Dolgopolski, the late Anna Dresner,
David Gold, A.A.  Greenbaum, the late Ezra Lahad, Avrom Lis and Nedda Strazhas
for their counsel.  David Goodblatt kindly brought the Goodblatt manuscript of
_Kenig Pik_ to my attention and let me use it.

2. Sholem-Aleykhem uses the form _kenig_, which is an acceptable variant,
though _kinig_ is more authentic.  I follow the author here. Uriel Weinreich
in his _MEYYED-(New York, 1968) lists both, preferring _kinig_.
Sholem-Aleykhem might have used _meylekh_ ('king'), but apparently the usual
term in this context among cardplayers was _kenig_.

3. A letter in the Sholem-Aleykhem Archives (Tel-Aviv) reveals that _Kenig
Pik_ was performed in Riga in 1911 by an amateur troupe under M. Vorki.
Programs were sent to Sholem-Aleykhem in Lausanne in 1913, but none has
survived.  All the evidence shows that Sholem-Aleykhem regarded the play as
performable.  Zilbertsvayg's entry on M. Vorki in his _Leksikon fun yidishn
teater_ does not mention _Kenig Pik_. Significantly, the number of
Sholem-Aleykhem plays for which Zilbertsvayg finds no record of performance or
translation is very small:  _Yidishe gazetn un zhurnaln_ ('Jewish
Periodicals'), _Az got vil shist a bezem_ ('God Can Do Anything'), _Homen un
mortkhe_ ('Haman and Mordechai'), _In tsveyen a zeks-un-zekhtsik_ ('A
Two-Handed Game of Sixty-Six'), _Komedye brak_ ('Trash Comedy') [not included
in the Folksfond Edition], and, of special interest to us, _Shrage_ [-Leksikon
fun yidishn teater_ 4:3389].

4. The manuscript (which the Goodblatt family eventually gave to Bet
Sholem-Aleykhem in Tel-Aviv) is written on pages 1-18 and on one side of the
page only.  The spaces between the vertical and horizontal lines are one-half
centimeter.  The cover, in addition to the multiplication table, carries the
address:  Cartoleria / Alessandro Barisione / Piazza Soziglia / Genova.  The
next to the last sheet of this twenty-sheet notebook has been torn out.  The
text is written in black ink in two different hands and the corrections are
made in red ink in a third hand, Sholem-Aleykhem's.  I am grateful to Shlomo
Tsuker of the Department of Manuscripts of the Jewish National and University
Library in Jerusalem for helping me to identify the handwriting in red ink as
Sholem-Aleykhem's.

5. Sholem-Aleykhem's letters toBerkovitsh contain numerous references to the
copying and typing of manuscripts.  In a letter to Tsvi Prilutski, editor of
_Der moment_, dated 6 December 1910, Sholem-Aleykhem relates that he has
"farfartikt far aykh tsvey naye freylekhe shtiklekh arbet, a
_Zeks-un-Zekhtsik_ un a _Kenig Pik_ un opgeshikt tsu berkovitshn af der
shraybmashin."  ('prepared for you two new merry pieces of work, a _Sixty-Six_
and a _King of Spades_ and sent them off to Berkovitsh to be typed'
[reproduced in _Bikhervelt_ (July/October 1922), 465-466].  This statement is
ambiguous:  since Sholem-Aleyukhem did own a typrwriter at this time, one
might him to be saying that he is 'sending off the two pieces typed by
himself'.  However, it is more likely that we are dealing here with an
elliptical expression:  "af [oystsuklapn af] der shraybmashin" ('to [type out
on] the typewriter').

6. I thank Tsvi Tsaplyovits for helping me to translate the Russian letters.

7. Further light is shed on this period by Y.-D.  Berkovitsh in his
memoiristic _Undzere rishoynim_ (Tel Aviv:  HaMenora), vol 4, pp. 160-4.
Berkovitsh writes:

        "Derbay iz vert tsu fartseykhenen, vi azoy der eynakter _Kenig pik_ un
        di dertseylung _A zeks un zekhtsik_ zaynen ba em aroysgebrakht gevorn.
        Zukhndik nokhtsukumen dem farlang funem _Moment_ vegn klenere zakhn,
        hot er ba zikh in arkhiv gefunen zaynem an altn, nit-gedruktn shpasikh
        eynakter mitn nomen _A zeks-un-zekhtsik_.  Er hot em genumen baarbetn
        fun dos nay un dervayl vegn dem gegebn tsu visn der redaktsye.  Di
        redaktsye hot zikh tsugeaylt un anonsirt far di lezer, az af khanike
        kumt Sholem-Aleykhems a humoristishe zakh, _A zeks-un-zekhtsik_.  Nor
        az Sholem-Aleykhem hot zikh neenter tsugekukt tsum altn
        _Zeks-un-zekhtsik_, hot er em farbrakirt un anshtot dem ongeshribn an
        andern dramatishn shpas, af a gants ander teme, untern nomen _Kenig
        Pik_.  Er hot es mir tsugeshikt farn _Moment_ un azoy geshribn: "Ikh
        shik aykh a nor vos fartrakht un ongeshribn zakhele lekoved khanike.
        Ikh hob gevolt oysbesern _Zeks-un-zekhtsik_, nor ikh hob derzen, az di
        zakh iz an alte. Me badarf hobn epes nays, dos letste geshrey fun der
        yidisher gas - - hob ikh mir ufgekhapt zeks a zeyger in der fri un biz
        akht ungevorn a brekele pyesele, vos ikh bob ungerufn _sharzh_ [pp.
        163-4].

        ('In this connection it is worth recording how he produced the one-act
        _Kenig-pik_ and the story entitled _Sixty-Six.  Seeking a way to
        satisfy _Der moment-'s demand for smaller items, he found an old
        unpublished farcical one-acter called _A Sixty-Six_ in his files.  He
        started to revise it and so informed the newspaper, whose editor
        promptly announced that a humorous story by Sholem-Aleykhem called _A
        Sixty-Six_ would appear on Chanuka. But when Sholem-Aleykhem took a
        closer look at the old _A Sixty-Six_ he scrapped it and instead wrote
        a comic sketch on a completely different subject called _King of
        Spades_.  He sent it to me for _Der moment_ with the following
        explanation: "I am sending you a little Chanuka piece which I have
        just now thought up and written.  I wanted to revise _A Sixty-Six_,
        but I saw that it was out of date.  We need something new, the dernier
        cri of the Jewish community.  I therefore woke up at six in the
        morning and by eight the miniplay, which I call a farce, was done."')

Berkovitsh goes on to explain that Sholem-Aleykhem, having promised _Der
moment_ a story entitled _A zeks in-zekhtsik_, sat down and wrote a new story
by that name.  This story has proved one ofthe author's most popular.

8. The title was changed to correspond to a card game different from the one
used in the denouement of the original.  The figures of the title refer to the
cards and not to characters in the play.

9. See _Sholem-aleykhem bukh_, New York, 1926, p. 296.

10. The change appeared apposite to Sholem-Aleykhem because the use of the
Hebrew term is appropriate to the fledgeling Hebraist in this sketch
burlesquing zealous Hebraism.  The Hebrew term also replaces a _daytshmerish_
one, but whether this was involved in the author's choice is hard to say.  In
any event, the Standard Yiddish term iz _zay/zayt/zayts moykhl_.

11. I am grateful to the late Ezra Lahad (d. 1995) for informing me of the
Cracow edition of _Kenig Pik_, which no one before him seems to have noticed.
Berkovitsh in the _Sholem-Aleykhem-bukh_ cites only the 1911 _Der moment_ and
_Der groyser kundes_ editions [p. 296] and it does seem strange that he did
not record the Cracow edition.  Sholem-Aleykhem may have placed the play in
the Cracow periodical directly and either Berkovitsh did not know about it or
in the course of six years forgot this small detail.  As regards the _Moment_
version, I have yet to see it although I have searched through the 1911 volume
of the newspaper in the Jewish National and University Library in Jerusalem.
It could conceivably have been part of a supplement which was not bound with
the rest of the paper.  I have not been able to check the 1910 volume, since
it was reported lost.  Berkovitsh makes it clear in _Undzere rishoynim_ that
Sholem-Aleykhem sent _Kenig Pik_ to _Der moment_ and in his _Sholem-Aleykhem
bukh_ recorded it as appearing there.  One may be fairly certain that it does
not differ significantly from the Cracow version.

12. Sholem-Aleykhem had to correct _kloymersht_ in the Goodblatt manuscript
three times, altering the final letter from the copyist's incorrect _sof_ to a
_tes_.  This points to the likelihood of dictation.

13) In general there is a good deal of _daytshmerish_ and a bit of English
influence in the Sholem-Aleykhem and Berkovitsh quotations given in this
article.  We must distinguish between their creative and their casual
writings:  the former is normally excellent Yiddish, but letters and business
communications are often another matter.  See _Jewish Language Review_
1:121-122.

14. On the Progressive Dramatic Club, see _Leksikon fun yidishn teater_
3:1857.

15. Line 26 of column 4 of the first page of _Kenig Pik_ ("griven. S'vet zayn
altsding" <Vendt zikh tsu>) was accidentally printed twice in _Der groyser
kundes_ and the significant words "guryeve kashe, telyatshene nozhke - -
pfui!" were omitted.  Sholem-Aleykhem's Khane looks down on aristocratic
dishes such as sweet porridge a la Gourieff (which Jews would not have eaten),
while approving of such peasant dishes as mamelige (which Jews did eat).

Leonard Prager


______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 5.279

Mendele has 2 rules:

	1. Provide a meaningful Subject: line
	2. Sign your article (full name please)

Send articles to:
    mendele@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

Send change-of-status messages to:
    listserv@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

        a. For a temporary stop: set mendele nomail
        b. To resume delivery: set mendele mail
        c. To subscribe: sub mendele first_name last_name
        d. To unsubscribe kholile: unsub mendele

Other business:
    nmiller@mail.trincoll.edu

              ****Getting back issues****

1. Anonymous ftp archives are available.

ftp ftp.mendele.trincoll.edu
    in the directory pub/mendele/files

    A table of contents is also available, along with weekly updates.

2. Mendele archives can also be reached as follows:

via WWW:
    http://sunsite.unc.edu/yiddish/mewais.html

via gopher:
    gopher://sunsite.unc.edu/11/../.pub/academic/languages/yiddish/mendele

via ftp:
    ftp://sunsite.unc.edu/pub/academic/languages/yiddish/mendele



