
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 6.277
April 4, 1997

1) Yiddish Studies in Israel III (Leonard Prager)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 26 Mar 97 23:48:26 IST
From: rhle302@uvm.haifa.ac.il
Subject: Yiddish Studies in Israel III

Publications

The individuals engaged in Yiddish scholarship in Israel invariably
have a certain sense of mission as regards rescuing and refurbishing a
largely lost or unknown body of works.  The Hebrew University hopes to
catalogue all Yiddish books printed during the first two centuries of
Yiddish printing, to index all major Yiddish periodicals up to World
War II, to prepare a modern-spelling critical edition of the works of
the greatest of all Yiddish writers, Sholem Aleichem.  Progress has
been made on all three projects (e.g. all major Warsaw Yiddish dailies
in the interwar period have been indexed and can be accessed
electronically). The Hebrew University Department of Yiddish also has
to its credit the publication 1f a distinguished series of edited
texts of major authors under the rubric "Yiddish Literature."  These
attractive paperback books for both student and educated laymen have
authoritative introductions and fresh critical assessments.  Arye
Pilovski (who heads the Yiddish Studies Program at the University of
Haifa) has not only compiled a volume of Aharon Reuveni's short
stories, he has restored this author's rightful place in Yiddish
letters and skilfully elucidated his complex career as bilingual,
Hebrew-Yiddish, writer.  Through Collected Yiddish Stories of Aharon
Reuveni (Jerusalem:  Magnes Press, 1991), Pilovski has helped to
reshape the constantly shifting contours of the Yiddish literary
canon.  This ongoing reordering and revaluing lends a needed vitality
to a critical enterprise centered on a literature whose indigenous
makers, while still potent, are fewer and fewer.  While well known to
the serious modern Hebrew reader, Reuveni had receded from the Yiddish
canon until reintroduced by Pilovski.  Moreover, Pilovski decisively
proved that Reuveni's important works published prior to 1918, thought
to have been composed in Hebrew, were in fact translations from
Yiddish.

The Great Dictionary Debacle

A significant feature of the "Yiddish Literature" series is their
Yiddish-Hebrew-English glossaries.  Glossaries in foreign-language
texts are hardly remarkable, yet these are.  Their uniqueness stems
from their being virtually the only place students can find the
meanings of many less common Yiddish words.  They include words which
cannot be found in the two best and most widely used bilingual (and
trilingual) dictionaries, Uriel Weinreich's Modern Yiddish-English
English- Yiddish Dictionary (New York:  McGraw-Hill, 1968) and
Alexander Harkavi's Yiddish-English-Hebrew Dictionary (New York:
Hebrew Publ.  Co., 1927; repr. 1988).  Strange as it may seem in an
age when world Jewry spends millions of dollars in memorializing the
victims of the Shoa, ceaselessly building Holocaust Museums, the
effort to record for ourselves and for posterity the immense lexical
riches of the Yiddish language (the language of so many of the
murdered millions) has so far largely failed.  The story of this
failure is international in scope, yet much of it is set in Israel.
The task of extracting the true facts from clouds of accusations and
counter-accusations is beyond the scope of this essay.  But we know
that the Groyser verterbukh fun der yidisher shprakh:ehp1.  ('Great
Dictionary of the Yiddish Language') (New York: vol.1, 1961; vol. 2,
1966; vol. 3, 1971; vol. 4, 1980), was conceived in New York and later
moved to Jerusalem, where it somehow expired.  The non-native Yiddish-
speaker/reader/writer is often dependent on dictionary help.  The four
volumes of the Groyser verterbukh cover the letter Alef ('A') and
include about one-third of the Yiddish lexicon (since numerous words
have prefixes beginning with alef, e.g. avek-, arum-).  Two-thirds of
the Yiddish word stock prepared for the Groyser verterbukh lingers in
card catalogues.

Nathan Susskind's English introduction to Vol. 4 is entitled "Yudel
Mark's Dictionary."  Mark died in 1975 in Israel.  One of the greatest
students of Yiddish in the world, he was a central figure in the
dictionary project.  In 1968 the Yiddish Dictionary Committee in New
York negotiated an agreement with the Hebrew University which enabled
Mark to settle in Jerusalem.  Susskind writes:  "The partnership with
the Hebrew University has proved a blessing in many ways.  Most
importantly it achieved what everybody hoped for:  ensuring the
continuation of the work."  Unfortunately nothing has yet insured the
continuation of Mark's work.  We still lack a comprehensive
Yiddish-Yiddish dictionary.  Can there be a more pressing agenda for
the world Yiddishist community than the creation of such a dictionary?

_Chulyot_ ('Links')

Dr.  Shalom Luria of the University of Haifa, son of the famous
Yiddish linguist Zelik-Hirsh Kalmanovitsh (1885-1944), founded a new
journal symbolically entitled "Chulyot" ('Links').  I believe it is
the first Hebrew-language periodical to devote itself wholly to
Yiddish language, literature and folklore, continuing the great
tradition of the Yivo publications such as "Filologishe shriftn" (1-5,
Vilna, 1926-1929), though its focus is mainly literary.  The first
issue was enthusiastically welcomed both in Israel and abroad and it
was quickly sold out.  The second issue, in a larger printing, with
the University of Haifa folklorist Dr. Chaye Bar-Itzhak as Associate
Editor, and now jointly sponsored by the Humanity Faculties of both
Haifa and Tel-Aviv Universities, made an even greater impression.  The
success of this journal suggests that among Israel's literary
intelligentsia there are a substantial number of persons who are
interested in Yiddish and even able to grapple with an original text
(with a dictionary, perhaps) but who would be somewhat pressed to read
entire critical articles in Yiddish.  "Chulyot" provides literary
texts in Yiddish and in Hebrew translation -- Luria's marvelously
felicitous Hebrew translations are themselves a contribution to Hebrew
letters.  Among the bridging functions of "Chulyot" is that of
familiarizing Israelis with the work of Yiddish scholars outside
Israel.

Shortly before his death several years ago, Professor Chaim Shoham of
the University of Haifa Department of Hebrew Literature finished
editing the first volume of his newly founded English-language journal
Haifa Studies in Jewish Theater and Drama (JTD).  The title itself
suggests the Sadan image of a unified multilingual Jewish literature.
Inherited by the University of Haifa theatre scholar, Dr.  Avi Oz,
this new journal should stimulate renewed interest in Yiddish theatre
and drama, encouraging proper exploitation of Israel's several theatre
archives. Just before his death (in 1995), Haifa's Ezra Lahad, with
the help of Dr.  Shalom Luria, completed his magnum opus, a
bibliography of the printed Yiddish drama.  Hopefully, this will
someday be published.

Bar-Ilan, Tel-Aviv Universities and Beersheba Universities

Bar-Ilan University, which has been especially successful in its
Yiddish-taught-in-Yiddish summer courses, and which has had the
benefit of the services of the eminent Hebrew University folklorist,
Professor Dov Noy, has also undertaken a program to reissue scarce
Yiddish works.  Noy has edited an attractive photo-reproduction
edition of the St.  Peterburg 1901 Ginzburg and Marek edition of
Yiddish Folksongs of Russia . Bar-Ilan has also awarded several
doctorates in Yiddish studies (e.g. to Ariela Krasni of Haifa in 1993
for her dissertation on the batkhn ('traditional wedding jester') as
seen in pre-modern sources).  Tel-Aviv University recently inaugurated
a Yiddish "chativa" ('program') to be guided by Professor Avraham
Novershtern.  It is funded by the London Maecenas of Yiddish culture,
William Margulies and his sister, Professor Alice Shalvi of Jerusalem,
and is dedicated to the memory of their parents (who were themselves
patrons of Jewish culture in London).

One of Tel-Aviv University's prominent linguists, Professor Paul
Wexler, who has written widely on Jewish languages, including Yiddish,
electrified the world of Yiddish with his startling theory that
Yiddish is Judeo-Sorbian, a Slavic language.  The accepted view is
that Yiddish developed from Middle High German.  Wexler also argued
that Modern Hebrew did not develop from Classical Hebrew, but was
Yiddish that had been relexified to Hebrew.  His third bombshell was
the assertion that Ashkenazic Jews stem from a small Palestinian
Jewish emigre community that intermarried with larger groups of
converts from Asia Minor, the Balkans and the Sorbian region --
correcting the views made popular by Arthur Koestler's The Thirteenth
Tribe (London, 1976), which traced Ashkenazic Jewry to the Khazars.
Though sharply attacked on all sides, Wexler's revisionist theories of
the origins of Yiddish, Hebrew, and Ashkenazic Jewry, generated useful
discussion -- which is by no means over.  Indeed, the question of the
origins of Yiddish is presently agitating the minds of Yiddishists the
world over.  Yiddish studies are a lively field.

Beersheba University has made significant progress in organizing the
letters to and from the eminent London Yiddish folklore scholar Jacob
Maitlis.  It took twelve years for the Hebrew University to catalogue
the Ravitsh archive, but it has been done.

                        [end of Part 3]

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 6.277

