Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 1 no. 113
November 26, 1991
 
1) Nasality (Aren Abramson)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 25 Nov 91 15:46:53 EST
From: Aren Abramson <ABRAMSON@UCONNVM.BITNET>
Subject: RE: Mendele Vol 1.107

Berl Hoberman's remarks on the possible sources of nasality
in Yiddish words from Hebrew sources spelled with 'ayin,
are interesting.The articulatory gestures of tongue-backing
and epiglottis-tilting are indeed what were found in the
studies alluded to in my last message on pharyngeal
fricatives, the work by Asher Laufer & Iovanna Condax and
by ElHalees of Jordan.

To go on and say that adding to this, or replacing it by, a
gesture of velum-lowering for nasality is a "gesture not
articulatorily too different" is another kettle of fish.
The muscles used for the gestures mentioned are not central
to the opening of the velo-pharyngeal port for nasal
coupling. A major mechanism is relaxation of the levator
palatini muscle needed to allow the velum to fall. Other
muscles have been implicated, so it is possible that the
pharyngeal constrictors could be involved, at least
concomitantly, in both kinds of movements, but they do not
act alone in these matters.

In addition, although the manifold manifestations of Arabic
show some variation, especially in the voiced paryngeal
fricative (see, e.g., work by Janet May), I do not know of
the rise of nasal consonants and vowels as replexes of this
Semitic consonant in any dialect of Arabic. If biblical
Hebrew and Old Arabic had the same kind of consonant, might
we not expect, should there indeed by a plausible
physiological phonetic link, to see similar developments in
Arabic? Of course, aside from the Yiddish question, one
would want to know why certain varieties of Sephardic
Hebrew took on nasality in such words. (Of course, if
someone knows of such a development in Arabic or another
Semitic language, that will have to be considered.)

Aren

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol 1.113

