
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 2 no. 45
July 24, 1992
 
1) Introduction and query (Shulamith Berger)
2) Introduction and query (Dan Slobin)
3) Yiddish in the former USSR (Victor Bers)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 23 Jul 92 09:16:11 PDT
From: Shulamith Berger <BM.YEB%RLG@Forsythe.Stanford.EDU>
Subject: Introduction and query

Well, after all this time I'm finally getting to introduce
myself. I'm the archivist at Yeshiva University and also do
some Judaica cataloging, which is what's prompting this
belated first message. I'm trying to catalog two books on
Lachoudisch/Lekoudesch (depending) on whose spelling you
prefer, and can't quite get a handle on them. The
cataloging records I have indicate that it's a German
dialect, but don't agree on whether or not Lachoudisch/
Lekoudesch is the name of the dialect, a term used for
Yiddish elements in German in general, or a term for
Yiddish in German in particular regions. The titles of the
books are Lachoudisch: Geheimsprache Schopflochs and
Lekoudesch: Integration Jiddischer Worter in die Mundart
von Rexingen bei Horb.

Any help will be appreciated.

Shulamith Berger

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 23 Jul 92 14:31:21 -0700
From: slobin@cogsci.Berkeley.EDU
Sunbject: An introduction and a query

I am Dan Slobin, a psycholinguist at the University of
California at Berkeley. I'm not a native speaker of
Yiddish, but when I was six my mother sat me down after
dinner--in Detroit in the forties--and taught me to read
and write Yiddish, first working through "Der Onheyber" and
later "Mayn Shprachbuch."

Many years later, my first published article was on Yiddish
pronouns of address (Word, 1963, 19:193-202), submitted
with encouragement from Uriel Weinreich, and based on
interviews with my grandmother and her generation.  Over
many years I corresponded with my grandmother in Yiddish,
and have a corpus of several dozen letters that she wrote
to me.  I have been analyzing these letters from various
points of view (formulaic language, representation of
kinship structure, epistolary organization).

Here's my query:  I once asked my grandmother how she
learned to write letters. She was born in 1888 in Uman,
Ukraine.  She told me that her father hired a tutor for her
and a small group of girls--it must have been somewhere
around the end of the last century--to ensure that they
would be literate in Yiddish and Russian. She remembered
that they used a letter-writing manual as a guide.  I have
found several such manuals in the YIVO library, but they
only present model letters, with no explicit instructions.
Does anyone know of manuals that also gave instructions
about how to write letters:  what to include, what opening
and closing forms to use, how to organize them, etc.?  I'm
eager to know the extent to which my grandmother's very
formulaic letters might have been based on explicit
instruction in the art of letter writing.

Dan Slobin (slobin@cogsci.berkeley.edu)

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 23 Jul 92 23:20:15 EDT
From: Victor Bers <VBERS@YaleVM.YCC.Yale.Edu>
Subject: Yiddish in the former USSR

Sid Resnick has asked me to pass on to MENDELE the
following translation of a statement issued by the
Committee for the Revitalization of Yiddish and Yiddish
Culture in the Soviet Union [sic]. It was printed, af mame
loshn avade, in the July 10 Forverts.

   The Committee for the Revitalization of Yiddish and
Yiddish Culture in the countries of the former Soviet Union
considered the appeals addressed to it by Yiddish writers
in Moscow and by Aaron Vergelis, the editor of the former
"Sovetish Heymland," for our help in publishing the new
journal, "Di Yiddishe Gass," which will be issued in place
of "Sovetish Heymland."

After a lengthy and intensive discussion it was decided to
offer this assistance despite our own severe objections to
the editor Aaron Vergelis for his past sins (khatoim). It
was acknowledged that "Sovetish Heymland" in the past two
years changed its tone and attitude to Yiddish cultural
activists and Yiddish writers in other countries and to the
State of Israel. It is our understanding that in the
countries of the former Soviet Union there exist today no
institutions other than the milieu of "Sovetish Heymland"
which both desire and are capable of rallying the remain
Yiddish cultural forces to revive the Yiddish secular
culture which came into being in the old Russia and was so
cruelly suppressed by the Commmunist authorities in the
Soviet Union.

We hope to achieve this revival through our joint efforts.
In order for this rapprochement to be mutual we will
request that in this new journal there shall also be
printed, without censorship, articles and literary works by
writers in the United States and in other countries. We
took into account the opposition which had revealed itself
in the Yiddish cultural world to any collaboration with
"Sovetish Heymland" and its editor, Aaron Vergelis.  It is
our view, however, that the time has come to set aside such
objections and to assist in all efforts which will be
undertaken to rebuild a Yiddish cultural life for the
millions of Jews who still live there.

Signed by Harold Ostroff, WIlliam Stern, co-chairmen and by
Joseph Mlotek, secretary.

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol 2.45

If your message is intended for MENDELE, please write to:

                 mendele@vax1.trincoll.edu

If you want to discuss personal business or have a shmues with
the shames, please write to:

                 nmiller@vax1.trincoll.edu

Please sign your articles.


