
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 3.076
August 12, 1993

1) Sukkah lights and cultural transfer (Naomi Cohen)
2) Sukka lights (Reyzl Kalifowicz-Waletzky)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed Aug 11 14:43:23 1993
From: ncohen@sjuphil.sju.edu (Naomi Cohen)
Subject: Sukkah lights and cultural transfer

A few years ago, my parents (of the Philadelphia area) began putting
strings of white "Christmas" lights on their sukkah.  They got the
idea from friends who had learned it from fellow parents at the
Lakeshore Hebrew Day School in New Orleans.  Noticing the December
decorations in the neighborhood, their then 5-year old son
reportedly said, "Look, Mommy, sukkah lights!"

Naomi Cohen

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 11 Aug 93 16:35 GMT
From: Roslyn Kalifowicz-Waletzky <0005943838@mcimail.com>
Subject: Sukka lights

Dear Naomi,

      I adore your story and I thank you so much for sending it to
me. It's wonderful because it shows so many aspects of what I was
referring to in my little essay: namely, how easily cultural
borrowing happens; how easily they are accepted by unself-conscious
people (e.g., children); how erasable cultural/ religious
associations can be among those whose modus operandi is aesthetics--
something that is not given sufficient weight in academics or even
popular  culture; how much cultural artifacts are ethnically
transportable when they either don't contain or have deleteable
offensive content; how a manufactured or natural product that has
been usurped by one ethnic or religious group for its ritual or
symbolic use can always be "liberated" of its imposed symbolic value
by another group; how quickly and easily ritual meanings are
assignable to artifacts by those not burdened by previous
associations, etc., etc..

      I don't know how it is in New Orleans or Philadelphia, but
here in New York I noticed that starting about 15 years or so ago,
since someone began manufacturing strings of small white lights
which were used to decorate the trees in front of high-profile
buildings and restaurants in midtown Manhattan during the Christmas
season, the trees I thought looked gorgeous.  Obviously, other
people thought so too and this tree decoration spread more and more,
(especially along Sixth Ave.).  A great many of the luxury
residential buildings on the Upper East Side built in the '80's seem
to have installed such tree decorations around Christmas time.
Presumably, since this decorative look had such a positive response
in treeless Midtown Manhattan, this "Christmas decoration" spread
all over Manhattan and in many places extends all year round. (Az es
kenen nisht vaksn ken grine bleter tsvishn the volknkratser,
kultivert men kleyne vayse likhtlekh.)

The reason for this is probably a very flamboyant (Jewish)
restauranteur named Walter LeRoy Jr. (actor Mervyn LeRoy's son) who
took this decorative idea and played it to the hilt.  He decorated
all the trees around his restaurant "Tavern on the Green", located
in Central Park, with miles of these gorgeous small speckled white
lights, resulting in what can only be described as "a winter
wonderland" all year round. Walter LeRoy Jr. is a phenomenal
promoter and businessman, and he knows what wins.  The restaurant is
a tourist mecca but it truly deserves an evening visit any old time
just to see the lighted glory.

So here is someone, along with others too I'm sure, who usurped this
Christian symbolic artifact, secularized it and now anyone can use
them any time of the year. These lights are smaller than the
traditional stringed 7 watts (or so) Christmas light bulbs one can
buy anywhere.  But then again I use those 7 watt multi-colored
Christmas lights to light my electric menorah on Khanuka.  Although
I always think about the Christmas association when I need to
replace the burned-out lempelakh because of 1)my own association
with that size bulb and 2) the bulb package marking "For Christmas"
or "Christmas Lights" (or something like that) on it, I still use
them.  But then I think I think that in replacing the original light
bulbs, I am maintaining a Jewish artifact (an electric menorah) as
"it was meant to be used" and one that is "different" from its
Christian use, and there's no problem for me with that.

So the corollary goes, why not put lights on your sukka? I've wanted
to do that myself but I haven't gotten it together yet. Having said
what I just said the question for me is, why do I still feel
uncomfortable in using those Christmas size light bulbs on my own
sukka but, in contrast, would love to use Walter LeRoy's type of
stringed light bulbs that probably cost twice as much?  Probably
because I want the sukka to be expressly Jewish both for me and for
my non- Jewish neighbors on both sides of our attached brownstone.
My six and a half year old would probably also say "Kuk mame, sukke
likht" (my kids speak Yiddish with us) but I myself can't quite do
that so easily. That's why Moses took the Jews around the desert for
forty years az di alte zoln oysshtarbm un a nayer dor zol emes kenen
opshatsn dem sizn tam fun frayhayt. Anyway, these are the kinds of
semiotic/cultural negotiations that Jews who want to live in both
the Jewish and non-Jewish world make all the time on all levels in
all categories.

Zayt gezunt,
Reyzl Kalifowicz-Waletzky

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 3.076

