
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 3.136
November 19, 1993

1) Leyenen/lezn and Standard Yiddish (Bob Hoberman)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu Nov 18 12:16:02 1993
From: Robert D Hoberman <RHOBERMAN@ccmail.sunysb.edu>
Subject: Leyenen/lezn and Standard Yiddish

My Litvishe parents differentiate leyenen and lezn as Khayim Bochner
described: me' leyent di teyre in shul, me' lezt a bukh.  (Ikh veys
nisht, tsi leyent men a seyfer oder lezt men.)

Here's a related question: a student whose parents' Yiddish uses
lezn (pronounced leyzn) asked me what the past participle of it was,
and I wasn't sure, so I went to look it up in Weinreich.  What do I
find there?  No definition or grammatical information, but only a
cross-reference to leyenen and the little wedge symbol that means
"inadmissible in the standard language." I find that very sad.  With
the dwindling human resources that Yiddish still has, can we afford
to throw anything away?  Does anyone else feel that way? Even more
so the little black dot (blackball) that means "of doubtful
admissibility in the standard language"--"a sofek tsi derlozlekh in
der klal-shprakh."  To me those are about the saddest words ever
written about Yiddish.  They imply that someday someone will decide
whether to accept the word, and that their decision will affect the
usage of a substantial community of Yiddish-users (not just
students).  It's clear that even now the standards of standard
Yiddish have little influence on many, perhaps most, of those who
speak, write, and publish in Yiddish nowadays, that most of them are
far more influenced by the need for cohesion of their particular
communities, and probably by a need to differentiate themselves from
all others in language as in dress and customs.  Could Weinreich
really not have seen this?

I feel the same way about standardizing Yiddish spelling.  I don't
think it's necessary, for two reasons:

	1.  Not all languages have fully uniform spelling in
practice, as we English speakers (and speakers of many other
European languages) feel is the sine qua non of a "real" language.
In modern Hebrew, for instance, there is quite a lot of variation in
the use of vav, yud, and alef to indicate vowels. Nearly everyone
(but not 100%) agrees in principle on "ktiv male", "full spelling",
which uses "extra" vavs and yuds that would not be in the word if
vowel dots were used, but the details in practice differ.  (For
instance, shulkhan 'table' is written shin-vav-lamed-khet-nun in
"full spelling", but in "lacking spelling" lacks the vav and has in
its place a kubuts [three diagonal dots] under the shin]; mikhtav
'letter' usually lacks a yud even in "full spelling", but I've seen
a yud in it in some respectable publications.) Although there is a
standard issued by the Hebrew Language Academy (and changed several
times in the last 40 years), far from everyone adheres to it; not
even all schools.  Each newspaper has its own policy, and you will
frequently see a word spelled differently (in respect to vav, yud,
and alef) between a headline and the body of an article.  To take a
different example, Dutch has "reformed" its spelling several times
within living memory, so that a Dutch friend in his 40's tells me
that his parents spell some words differently from him while
nowadays again slightly different rules are taught in school.  In
Chinese there are many unofficial variant characters in use, even
within the PRC, not to mention Taiwan and Hong Kong.

	2.  No orthography is designed chiefly for learners of the
language; writing systems are for people who already know the
language.  Therefore, it is not necessarily of the highest priority
for Yiddish spelling to indicate the pronunciation.  Given the
dialect variation, there are several approaches that are used in
languages around the world: (a) select one dialect as the standard,
and make the spelling system fit it, ignoring the other dialects;
(b) develop a system that, while it does not fit the phonetics of
any one dialect, provides a form from which the various dialectal
pronunciations can be deduced, in most cases; this is the case in
the writing system used by modern Christian speakers of Aramaic
(Syriac), and much less neatly by English; (c) develop a system that
is maximally simple, even if two or more sounds are written
indistinguishably, so that it can be easily learned by anyone
regardless of dialect.  The YIVO spelling of Yiddish is pretty much
on model (a), with a bit of (c).  Not a bad choice, considering the
alternatives (write the vowels according to proto-Yiddish?!).

	3.  The urge for further standardizing Yiddish spelling
presupposes that there is a community of users whose lives would be
made easier, and especially that there is a population of children
who will achieve their dominant literacy in the language.  But
nowadays there's next to no-one who reads and writes more in Yiddish
than in any other language.  Even for those who read Yiddish the
most, the majority of what they read was written earlier than the
modern standard spelling or by people who ignore it.   And this will
always be the situation from now on!  Any Yiddish student has to
become comfortable with various styles of spelling.  So, to my mind,
the sooner and more they see variation the better.  How should they
be taught to write?  Might as well be the YIVO standard, but let's
not get hot under the collar about it.

I hope I haven't made myself persona-non-grata in Yiddish circles.
I know a lot of people feel strongly about these things, even
dedicate their lives to them.  I hope I haven't offended anyone.

So, what IS the past participle of lezn?

Bob Hoberman

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 3.136

Send submissions/responses to:

        mendele@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

Other business:

        nmiller@starbase.trincoll.edu

Anonymous ftp archives available on:

        ftp.mendele.trincoll.edu
        in the directory pub/mendele/files




