
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 4.179
November 13, 1994

1) Yiddish script & YIVO (Arn Abramson)
2) /redt/ and /bistu/ (Arn Abramson)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sat, 12 Nov 94 21:22:02 EST
From: abramson@uconnvm.uconn.edu
Subject: Yiddish script & YIVO

Two postings of the last few days, one by Dovid Braun and one by Meylekh
Viswanath, touch on old questions in the development of writing systems as
to how much linguistic information should be captured by the orthography.
Thus, some argue, contrary to the spelling reformers, that in English it
is good to keep the letter G in the word "sign," which is pronounced the
same as "sine," in order to show the relationship with "signify,
signal,"etc. but not with "sine." But I do not mean to get into a
discussion here about the fit between English orthography and English
speech. Let us turn to Yiddish.

Dovid reminds Shleyme and me about the possibility of the same letter
occurring twice in a row in YIVO transcription when two morphemes abut,
the first ending in the same consonant as the one at the beginning of the
second. He is right; that is the practice; however, it should be
understood that the point taken from an earlier discussion by Zellig Bach
is also right. All the examples used by us for the forbidding of two
consonant letters in a row were, in fact, single morphemes: ale, bobe,
Got,etc. (An exception is "Yiddish," which is Yid + the ish suffix;
however, the suffix does not begin with /d/ or any other consonant.) In
the stored version of our FAQ, then, Shames Noyekh ought to add something
like this: "If, however, two meaningful elements within a word
(morphemes) come together such that the first one ends and the second one
begins with the same consonant, the letter for that consonant occurs
twice in a row." Dovid's examples could be given.

At the same time, I wonder about Dovid's remark, "even though, in fact,
the consonants are pronounced as if only one were present." Does he mean,
e.g., that in "onnemen" the speaker does not normally remove the tip of
his tongue from the upper gum ridge (alveolar ridge) after saying "on"
and then put it back to say "nemen," he is surely right, but it is my
impression that the /n/ is significantly longer in, say, "Er vil onnemen"
than in "Er vil yo nemen." (If my examples are unidiomatic, forgive me;
the phonetic point is still valid as long as my obssrvation is correct.)
In some languages consonant length--or gemination-- has a distinctive
function even within the word, as in Italian, Finnish, and Estonian. In
their use of roman script, the orthographies of these languages use
double letters in such cases. My point here, then, is that if I, a
non-native speaker of Yiddish, am right in my phonetic observation, there
is all the more reason to incorporate Dovid's addition in our notes.

Meylekh's question is relevant to this discusson. He writes,"Ikh vil ober
visn, zugt men take 'redt' tsi 'ret?'" Obviously, the answer is that one
pronounces the word /ret/. The roan spelling "redt" is a real
_transliteration_, i.e., a conversion letter by letter, from the Yiddish
spelling reysh-ayen-daled-tes. On the one hand, the spelling "ret" would
be phonetically clear and would not have confused Reb Maylekh; on the
other hand, the spelling, much as in the case of English "sign," has the
possible virtue of reminding us that it is part of the conjugation of the
verb /redn/ 'to speak.' If I had written Shames Noyekh's remark, quoted
by Meylekh, "azoy redt men!," I would have written "ret," but this seems
not to be the convention.

Curiously enough, there are instances in which the morphemic or lexical
information is not preserved in the writing. On this board I have seen
"bistu" for /bis du/ 'are you (fam.).' It also occurs in Yiddish script
in the equivalent way way: beyz-yud-samekh-tes-vov! the rendition "tu"
must be meant to reflect the lack of a contrast between /d/ and /t/
immediately after /s/ and the impression that the consonant is more like
a /t/ than a /d/. (Leigh Lisker remarked on this in a posting some time
ago . No one  responded.) Compared with the writing of "redt," this is
paradoxical. Why not preserve the information that it is the pronoun
"du"?

Again, I ask, as I did in my recent remarks on Hebrew quotations in
Yiddish as contrasted with integrated Hebrew-Aramaic loanwords, whether
one of our professional Yiddishists might comment.

Arn Abramson

[The stored version of the FAQ will be appropriately amended.  nm]

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sat, 12 Nov 94 21:42:04 EST
From: abramson@uconnvm.uconn.edu
Subject: /redt/ and /bistu/

Just after sending my long comment on Dovid Broun's comment and Meyelekh
Viswanath's question, I read Mikhl Herzog's explanation about the
practice of preserving morphological information in YIVO orthography
--and, I guess, in Yiddish script. He is a distinguished Yiddishist, and
I accept his answer with pleasure, but I would like hime to comment on
the paradox of the spelling /bistu/ for the expression /bis du/ 'Are you
(fam.).' In my comment sent out a little while ago,I said that this
surely violates the principle Mikhl mentions. The absence of a space for
a word-break in that spelling does not help me,since it is generally true
in running speech, in language after language, that there need not be,
and there usually is not, any phonetic sign of a word boundary.

Arn Abramson

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 4.179

Mendele has 2 rules:

	1. Provide a meaningful Subject: line
	2. Sign your article (full name please)

A Table of Contents is now available via anonymous ftp, along with weekly
updates.

Anonymous ftp archives available on:
          ftp.mendele.trincoll.edu
          in the directory pub/mendele/files

Archives available via gopher on:
        gopher.cic.net

Send articles to:
        mendele@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

Send change-of-status messages to:
        listserv@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

        a. For a temporary stop: set mendele nomail
        b. To resume delivery: set mendele mail
        c. To unsubscribe kholile: unsub mendele

Other business:
        nmiller@mail.trincoll.edu



