
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 3.249
February 27, 1994

1) The English name or Yiddish (Yosel Berman)
2) Funny, you don't look Yiddish. . . (Meyshe Alpert)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu Feb 24 16:02:41 1994
From: BERMAN <berman@mars.senecac.on.ca>
Subject: Re: The English name or Yiddish

Though I am not a linguist, I imagine that many of the language
names used in English (such as Japanese and French) have historic
reasons for being what they are. Whether the English names derived
from the ignorance of those making first contact, or other
linguistic reasons (why Hungarian, for Magyar?) these names are NOT
simply translations into English.

The Yiddish language is one which relies extensively on nuance and
subtlty. When engaging in a Yiddish conversation, one would never
experience any confusion as to whether the word 'Yidish' is being
used to mean the language or the word meaning 'Jewish'. English, on
the other hand, lacks the context which is inherrent in Yiddish.
Thus, it would often be confusing if the word "Jewish" were used for
both meanings. Many "Jewish" expressions, or Jewish humour, are of
North American origin and not necessarily Yiddish in origin. If I
told you a story and then said it was originally a "Jewish" joke,
would you know whether it originated in in Yiddish speaking Poland,
or from Jackie Mason in the Catskills?

Finally, there are other Jewish Languages (Ladino and Hebrew among
others). It would not be fair, or accurate, to use the word "Jewish"
to describe only one of them. Jewish religion, culture, and
tradition encompass far more than the Yiddish language. It is useful
to have separate unambiguous words for these two concepts.

Yosel Berman

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu Feb 24 17:04:10 1994
From: meyshke@aol.com
Subject: Funny, you don't look Yiddish. . .

Re: Ellen Prince: "the name for 'yiddish' in other languages"

Getrofn, Ellen, as usual (a mazl af dayn kop)!  Like many of us, I
also grew up hearing the language called 'Jewish', or, more
accurately, 'Dzewis', in its Boston Litvak pronounciation. And of
course, very few people 'spoke' it; the majority 'talked' it.

'Yiddish' may indeed smack of avoiding the J-word - there certainly
was and is plenty of that going around, as you illustrate. On the
other hand, I wonder whether in this case impetus also came from the
academy (YIVO, et al), for more positive reasons. Dina Abramowicz
points out that in the first issue of  "YIVO-bleter" in 1938, the
English title refers to the 'Yiddish Scientific Institute' - the
original name of the YIVO in the US as well, into the 1960s, I
believe. This whole issue is of course larger and older than just
the YIVO and its cultural politics, but I think the institution and
its associates played a not-insignificant role in setting the scene
for the reception of Yiddish in the Americas, especially after the
war.

Dina, who was on the scene for much of the discussion around the
issue in both Europe and the US, feels that Weinreich, et al. mainly
wanted to distinguish 'Yiddish' language and culture from the
greater category, 'Jewish'. She didn't buy the "avoidance" line,
pointing out that 'yid' was a more pejorative term in the English of
the day than was 'Jew'. Maybe. Along those lines, we both noted that
the YIVO continued to use 'zydowski' ('Jewish') in Polish, rather
than inventing something new there. Greater pundits than I will
probably have more to say about all this (and, knowing Mendele, I'm
sure they will).

In this regard, however, I am fond of pointing out that the current
use of the term 'klezmer music', to denote a musical genre that is
today actually much broader than the instrumental klezmer tradition
(strictly defined), probably reflects more than a drop of avoidance
of the J-word, or the Y-word, for that matter.

Consider  a typical folk festival advertisement, which might
announce performances of traditional Irish, Quebecois, French,
Puerto Rican and Klezmer music. Funny, you don't look Klezmer. In
late 20th century America, 'klezmer' is hip, 'Yiddish' or 'Jewish'
unfortunately not, in all too many contexts. 'Yiddish' mainly draws
an audience of senior citizens, 'klezmer' is increasingly - and
happily - the happening thing among ever younger fans. At the risk
of tooting my own horn (so to speak - I'm a string player and
singer, after all), I must say that in the mid-1970s, back at the
dawn of the Klezmer Revival (fanfares here!), I was a stubborn
proponent of calling the music we were making 'Yiddish music' or
"Jewish music', since the repertoire we were performing drew from
numerous other genres including Yiddish folk, theater and art song,
Hassidic music, liturgical compositions, etc. I finally gave in
around 1987, just when the opportunity arose to do battle with the
term 'klez'. . .  (a yid hot tsores on a shir).

OK. 'Nuff said. Let the wild rumpus start. And as it rages, lom ikh
oysdrukn a tifn un greysn dank fun gantsn hartsn di ale, vos ir hot
mir azezy sheyn mekabl ponim geven bay mayn arayntretn in Mendele
arayn. Gebentsht zolt ir mir ale zayn mit gezunt un glik, nakhes un
freyd, mazl,  brokhe, parnose un hatslokhe biz hundert un tsvantsik
yor a yedn eynem, un dertsu a por libe un sheyne idishe tener, mit
kishkes!

Meyshe Alpert

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 3.249

To subscribe, send SUB MENDELE FIRSTNAME LASTNAME to:

                   LISTSERV@YALEVM.YCC.YALE.EDU

Mendele has 2 rules:

	1. Provide a Subject: line.
	2. Sign your article.

Send submissions/responses to:
        mendele@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

Other business:
        nmiller@starbase.trincoll.edu

Anonymous ftp archives available on:
        ftp.mendele.trincoll.edu
        in the directory pub/mendele/files

