
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 5.169
November 14, 1995

1) Standard Yiddish (Bob Poe)
2) Zhargon (Chana Mlotek)
3) Poem about Yiddish (Chana Mlotek)
4) Soviet Yiddish songs (Chana Mlotek)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 13 Nov 95 15:33:31 EST
From: poe@keps.com
Subject: Standard Yiddish

I'd like to make a few points that, I think, have not yet been raised on
this subject.  I am not a linguist, however, so I invite correction from
those who know.

(a) I have always had a mental image of the evolution of a language that
starts in a prehistoric time when the language group is small and unified
and all speakers speak very similarly.  Then, as the group expands and
spreads out geographically, various subgroups become somewhat isolated
from each other, and their speech begins to diverge, forming regional
dialects.  Thus, one rational goal of a standard might be to restore and
preserve the original root language, or otherwise to identify the common
elements of the various dialects as a basis for a cross-regional lingua
franca.

(b) In practice, even if there is an identifiable common root, this is
unlikely to happen.  Instead, one dialect tends to become dominant over
the others, because of the political, religious, cultural, commercial, or
intellectual dominance of one region over the others. When a language
group becomes a nation, the dialect of the capital or of the court may
provide the basis for a standard.  (I think I have read that different
dialects were dominant in the history of English, because of the
different political dominance of the regions at different times.)

(c) But this is only the *basis* of a standard language.  Typically, an
aristocracy (of power, of wealth, of education, of culture) emerges in
the dominant region and places increasing demands on the language as more
complicated and subtle forms of expression are needed.  Thus, a class
distinction arises, which eventually transcends the regional
distinctions.  The standard language becomes larger, more powerful, more
refined, more literary, more regular, more self-conscious.  It does not
supplant the dialects:  ordinary people in London or Paris speak with
strong local variants of the language, but intellectual discourse in
those cities or in New York, Edinburgh, Sidney, or Nice, will tend toward
the standard.  It is quite common for a person to lose his or her local
or regional dialect, more or less consciously, through education,
although it may still tend to resurface in certain contexts.  And I've
been told that the "purest" French is not the "debased" speech of Paris,
but that spoken in the Loire Valley, where so many of the aristocracy
lived.

(d) Once there is a (de facto) standard language, it tends to evolve
alongside the dialects, but perhaps more conservatively. Certainly, the
written language tends to slow down the process of change in spelling and
(even) pronunciation.  Thus, the way a language is spelled tends to
reflect the way it was pronounced some centuries ago, when the writing
system settled down.

(e) In some cases, the standard may actually become codified and
regulated by the "authorities".  The Academie Francaise is the usual
example given.  This has not happened in English, for instance, where the
authorities are kept busy enough keeping track of what *is*, rather than
what *should be*.

How does this apply to Yiddish?  Well, the standard may well represent a
refined, literary language that evolved from a dominant dialect, and the
spelling (both in Hebrew and in Roman characters) is based on an earlier
pronunciation of that language.  (The YIVO reforms may have altered that
situation somewhat.)  In other words, it is probably *not* a synthetic
fabrication of the scholars.  So perhaps someone can comment on whether
"oyf" was once pronounced as written in the Litvish dialect or in
literary circles--say, 200 years ago.  Or whether the "ey" pronunciation
common in Litvish for "oy" in the standard is a more recent evolution in
the common speech of the region.  (Those seem to be the most prominent
differences between common Litvish pronunciation and the standard
spelling.)

Some of us might have preferred a synthetic standard, which was
constructed to be dialect-neutral, but history has proclaimed otherwise.
I seriously doubt whether the preference for Litvish forms in the
standard was imposed arbitrarily by a small number of scholars in the
20th century.

Certainly, it is the standard language that should be taught in schools
and that should be used for intellectual discourse. Non-native speakers
should (first) be taught the standard. But the dialects are the living
speech of the people, and no one should be ashamed to use one if he or
she is fortunate enough to have grown up speaking it or has otherwise
acquired it. They even play a role in the written language--for instance,
for realistic dialogue in fiction and drama--, just as in English or
other modern languages.

This last comment raises one more question:  how do you indicate dialect
pronunciations in writing?  I have seen it written several times on
Mendele that the YIVO orthography can be used phonetically for this
purpose, but I'm not completely convinced. In particular, how does one
indicate the distinction between long and short vowels, which has been
lost in the standard? E.g., der zun vs. di zun:  Should we write "der
ziin"? "der zi:n"? "der zihn" (got zol ophitn!)?  And how do you do that
in the Hebrew alphabet?

Bob Poe

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 13 Nov 1995 21:40:31 -0500
From: zishe@aol.com
Subject: Zhargon

With respect to the so-called disparagement by Sholem Aleichem in his
usage of the word "zhargon" in referring to Yiddish, may I suggest that
Prof. Michl Herzog is correct-- his argument is substantiated in Max
Weinreich's _History of the Yiddish Language_, where a section is devoted
to this subject (5.4). Up to the beginning of the 20th century Weinreich
writes _zhargon_ was used as a neutral designation.  "In Sholem
Aleichem's miscellany _Yiddishe folksbibliotek_ (vol. 1, 1888), we read:
_'Di hefkervelt: a zhargonish verk'_... _'Zikhroynes iber zhargonishe
shrayber'_...At the end of the volume the editor, Sholem Aleichem, writes
'about Jargon orthography' and calls for 'a Jargon grammar.'   In this
article Mendele is included among 'our best Jargonists'... In a letter to
Spektor in 1902, Sholem Aleichem wrote: 'Ah, Jargon, Jargon!  Who knows
what role it is destined to play among our people.'"  Weinreich mentions
other titles of works that were called Jargon, and were later changed to
Yiddish.

In my research of folk poets I came across a poem by the Maskilic poet
Michel Gordon (1823-1890), author of popular songs like "Di bord" (The
Beard), "Di mashke (Whiskey) and others.  Incidentally, Peretz wrote that
Gordon wasn't known because "our Hebrew, Polish and Russian writers are
always silent about the work and influence of jargon."  Michel Gordon has
a poem "Der kadokhes" in which he hides himself under the name of Jargon.
Jargon (Gordon) laughed at Kokher's  (a made-up name) beard and therefore
he's suffering from ague. (See my paper "A gilgl fun Mikhl Gordon's _Di
bord_" (Transformation of Michel Gordon's _The Beard_), _Yivo Bleter_,
xxxv, 1951, pp.299-311).

Chana Mlotek

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 13 Nov 1995 21:40:31 -0500
From: zishe@aol.com
Subject: Poem about Yiddish

The poem is entitled "Yiddish" and it was written by Morris Rosenfeld
(1862-1923).  Chana and Joseph Mlotek, who conduct a bi-weekly column in
the Yiddish newspaper _Forverts_, "Perl fun der yidisher poezye" (Pearls
of Yiddish Poetry) have been replying to such inquiries as yours now for
25 years and readers can avail themselves of this service.  In the
original there are ten stanzas- (Is this too long to print?) but there
are some minor differences in the text that Anno cited.  The third stanza
he cites is the last (the tenth stanza) of the poem.

Last stanza:

Es megn gebn undzere pney
Far undzer shprakh a groshn,
Mir lakhn zikh oys fun zey
Un reydn mame-loshn!

Chana Mlotek

4)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 13 Nov 1995 21:40:31 -0500
From: zishe@aol.com
Subject: Soviet Yiddish songs

[Anna Shternshis's] idea (5.161) of finding the Jewish elements in the
first collection of Moshe Beregovski is interesting.  The singling out of
Shabes might also apply to your theme: "Dem eynem tog shabes" (Beregovski
no. 13-14); "Shabes farnakht, vi me zet nokh nit keyn shtern" (18);
"Shabes baytog iz a yomer mit a klog" (43); or "Rosh-khoydesh elel,
mamenyu, oyfdernakht" (45).

Studying in kheyder: "Ikh hob opgelernt eyn blat gemore, / Ikh bin a
yingl fun dem kheyder aroys." (no. 50, also 51:3)

Speaking Yiddish: "Kinstlekh redt er rusish gut - Yidish nit kayn vort"
(34:3);  "Rusish redt er on a shir, - Yidish nit kayn vort" (37:3)

Anti-Semitic utterances and references: "Un itster - iz dokh ongekumen
Petlurovtses" (no. 25); "Podn'ali nagajki i kriknuli: zhidy!" (no. 32).

Chana Mlotek

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 5.169

