
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 5.305
April 16, 1996

1) "Tkhine leyoldes" (Leonard Prager)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 16 Apr 96 18:16:22 IST
From: rhle302@uvm.haifa.ac.il
Subject: "Tkhine leyoldes"

In an earlier notice (vol 5, no. 293) on the _Tekhine Rav Peninin_ (Tel-Aviv:
Sinai, n.d.  <ca. 1918>) I remarked how cunningly constructed many of the
prayers were -- an impression which is not enforced by any one of the three
separate discussions of _tkhines_ in the _Encyclopaedia Judaica_ (11:396;
11:398; 15:907).

Meyer Waxnan and Mordecai Waxman write:  "Often changed to fit the feminine
temperament, Yiddish translations of the _tehinnot_ ... emphasize God as a
loving father rather than as a stern judge:  the merit of the matriarchs
rather than that of the patriarchs; and defines rewards in terms of pious and
virtuous children.  The tone of the writing is romantic and sentimental, its
style verbose and popular, and, in general, represents a folk literature which
mirrored daily life in the home and the ghetto."  (_EJ_ 11:356) The same
authors also write: "The composition of _tkhines_ for every phase of life
offered writers greater freedom of expression.  Couched in personal and
intimate language, the prayers reflect both piety and the heartfelt sentiments
of Jewish women.  While the first collections were composed by men...
subsequent efforts were largely those of women." (_EJ_ 11:358)

Abraham Meir Habermann adds:  "_Tehinnah_, a _piyyut_ form which originated in
the _tahanun_ prayer for the fasts of Monday and Thursday. The term was also
transferred to _piyuttim_ for the _selichot_ days, and indeed both the
construction and subject of the _tehinnah_ are similar to _selichot_.  The
_tehinnah_ is usually said quietly, its subject being the relationship between
God and the people of Israel.  It is sometimes constructed in rhymed verses,
sometimes in rhymed rhetoric, or even unrhymed, in the style of a _bakkashah_.
In addition to Hebrew _tehinnot_, there were Yiddish-German ones for women
published from the beginning of the 18th century in Bohemia (Prague),
Switzerland (Basle), Germany (Sulzbach, Fuerth, Roedelheim), and many towns of
Russia and Poland."(_EJ_ 15:907)

These brief remarks are almost all of what we find in the _EJ_ (ripe for a
revised edition) on the -tkhine- genre.  They may be apposite for the Hebrew
_tehinnot_ and the early Yiddish _tkhines_ (which Habermann curiously terms
"Yiddish-German"), but help a lot less in the case of a late blossoming such
as _Rav peninim_.  Habermann writes that "The _tehinnah_ is usually said
quietly...." and the reader might think this is being said of Yiddish
_tkhines_ as well.  There are doubtless _tkhines_ which are said quietly, but
many of the _tkhines_ in _Rav peninim_ explicitly call for the accompaniment
of tears, e.g.  "Tkhine shaarey demooys" ('Gates of Tears Prayer'):  "Di
tkhine zol men zog(e)n ... mit fil trer(e)n."  The "Tkhine shaarey rakhamim"
is recited with "groys geveyn" ('great weeping').  In the _Tkhine leerev
reshkhoydesh_ (pp. 189-190), we read:  "Reboyne-sheloylem, foter
derbaremdiker, her oys dos gebet fun dayn dinst velkhe kumt yetst far dir for,
un oyb kholile di toyern fun tfile zenen farshlosn, ober di toyern fun trern
zenen dokh shtendik ofen, vi es shteyt geshribn shaarey demooys loy ninolu.
Nem tsu baremhartsiker foter mayne heyse trern velkhe ikh fargis yetst far dir
in dayn heylikn hoyz, lozn zey opvashn ale mayne zind velkhe ikh bin gegn dir
bagangen."  ('Almighty, merciful father, hear the plea of your servant who now
comes before you, and if Heaven forbid the gates of prayer are closed, those
of tears are always open, as it is written:  "The gates of tears never close."
Merciful father, accept the hot tears which I now shed before you in your holy
house, let them wash away all the sins I have committed against you.')  The
_Tkhine leyoldes_ is explicitly recited by weeping women for a woman in labor;
this weeping was surely audible.

The Waxmans tell us that in Yiddish _tkhines_ "The tone of the writing is
romantic and sentimental...."  I am not sure what is meant by "romantic" here
and I do not find much that is "sentimental" in the sense of exaggerated or
inappropriate sentiment.  It is surely significant that in the very midst of
an emotional appeal in the _Tkhine leerev reshkhoydesh_ (suggesting the
classical _deesis_, impassioned supplication of the gods or of men), an
argument of authority is cited. This quotation is like classical
_apomnemonysis_ (quoting an approved authority, in this case the Talmud -- the
precise source has escaped me).  Does this tell us the author of this _tkhine_
was a man?  Not necessarily, since there were learned women, often scholars'
daughters like Sore Bas-Tovim, who composed _tkhines_.  There is as much logic
as there is emotion in many of the prayers.  Analogical reasoning, as in the
_Tkhine leyoldes_, is common:  God helped Abraham when he prayed that
Elimelech's wife and servants should bear their children and _they_ were
idol-worshipers.  If God helped pagan wives, how much more qualified for help
are Jewish wives.  Intimacy is of course the hallmark of all _tkhines_ (God is
normally addressed as _du_, .e.g.  "zolstu" in _Tkhine leyoldes_) and we
should thus not be taken aback by their forthrightness -- and rationality --
in one of the _tkhines_ God is asked to provide adequate supplies of food
_before_ shortages set in and the children begin to go hungry.  The praying
woman does not only request God's help, she also lays claim to it by virtue of
the theology of accumulated merits, saving this forceful argument for the
close of her appeal.  God is repeatedly reminded who He is, the suppliant thus
exercising a certain power from within her powerlessness.

Form is important in the Hebrew _tehinna_ and Habermann mentions it in
passing, but we are told nothing of its place in the Yiddish _tkhine_. Even a
cursory reading of the _Tkhine leyoldes_ reveals a rich assortment of figures
and devices, especially figures of repetition, of balance (_mekatregim_
'prosecutors' vs.  _melitsim_ 'defenders'), and of repeated sounds.  (There
are, as I have already shown above, fancy Greek or Latin names for all these
figures, tropes, etc.).  We have much alliteration such as _geshvint un gring
geborn_, _zolst farmakhn di mayler fun ale mekatregim_ (/f/ and /m/ sounds).
We have frequent synonymy and rime, as in _trern un veynin_ and _undzere trern
vos mir veynen un fargisn_, rime endings in _maysim toyvim_, synonymy alone in
the fixed phrase _on tsar un on yesurim_.  There are several allusions (e.g.,
_Khaves klole_).  The entire _tkhine_ is one long sentence (classical
_continuatio_?) joined by conjugations, mainly _un_ 'and' (cf.  Der Nister in
modern Yiddish literature.)  It marches forward forcefully to a note of joy in
its anticipation of a successful delivery.  Though an act of female
solidarity, the prayer is, however, for a male child!

"Tkhine leyoldes" (pp. 428-9)

A naye tkine far ayoldes <a yoldes> vos geyt tsum kind, andere zol far ihr
<ir> beten <betn>:  Riboyne-sheloylem, mir zenen yetst gekumen far dir mit tsu
brokhene <tsebrokhene> hertser un mit fihl <fil> treren <trern> fargisen
<fargisn>, fun vegen <vegn> di isho (ploynis bas ploynis) vos zi darf yetst
geboren <geborn> ihr <ir> kind, du liber rakhmones'diger <rakhmonesdiker> got,
zolst af ihr <ir> rakhmones hoben <hobn> zi zol geshvint un gring geboren
<geborn> on tsar un on yesurim, den der shlisul <shlisl> fun agevineren <a
gevinerin> iz dokh in dayn hand <hant>, un dayne rakhmones zenen dokh groys af
yeder bashefenish, hob rakhmones af di isho, un zolst zehen <zen> unzere
<undzere> treren <trern> vos mir veynen un fargisen <fargisn> fun ihretvegn
<iret vegn>, un azoy vi di toyeren <toyern> fun treren <trern> zenen nit
farshlosen <farshlosn>, un azoy vi du host ongenumen di tfile fun avrom ovinu
ven er hot gebeten <gebetn> far dem vayb un di dinsten <dinstn> fun elimeylekh
zey zolen <zoln> geboren <geborn> zeyere kinder, un zey hoben <hobn> gring
geboren <geborn>, vos zey zenen geven getsen <getsn> diner, un mir zenen yetst
gekumen far dir rakhum vekhanun beten <betn> du zolst rakhmones hoben <hobn>
af di yudishe <yidishe> froy vos zi dint tsu dir rakhum vekhanun, du zolst
efenen ihr <ir> muter layb <muterlayb> geshvint un gring on tsar un on
yesurim, un azoy vi du host geretet ale frume vayber fun khave's <khaves>
klole azoy zolstu di isho oykh reten <retn>, un zi zol lang leben <lebn> un
zayn a muter tsu dem lebedigen <lebedikn> kind, vos zi vet yetst geboren
<geborn>, zi zol ihm <em> ufhodeven tsu toyre khupe un maysim toyvim, un ven
khas vesholem zi hot epes gezindigt <gezindikt>, zolstu on nemen <onnemen> ihr
<ir> yetstige <yetstike> tshuve, du bizt <bist> dokh nohnt <noent> tsu yeder
mentsh vos ruft tsu dir mit emes un mit zayn gantsen <gantsn> harts, un ven
amentsh <a mentsh> iz khas vesholem in der greste tsore biztu <bistu> dokh
zayn helfer, un in dem skhus fun ihre <ire> heylige <heylike> elteren
<eltern>, un in dem skhus fun unzere <undzere> mitsves un maysim toyvim, un in
dem skhus fun ihre <ire> mitsves un maysim toyvim zolstu on nemen <onnemen>
unzere <undzere> treren <trern> un veynen un beten <betn> vos mir beten <betn>
far ihretvegen <iret vegn>, un zolst farmakhen <farmakhn> di mayler fun ale
mekatrigim vos zenen mekatreg af ihr <ir>, un zolst heysen <heysn> kumen far
dir ale gute melitsim fun ihretvegen <iret vegn>, un es zol bald gehert veren
<vern> in shtub simkhe vesosen mit dem nayem geborinem kind, omen:

English translation:

A new prayer for a woman in labor to be recited for her by others:  God
Almighty, we have now come before you with broken hearts and having shed many
tears for this woman N.xxxxxx daughter of N.xxxxxx, who must now give birth to
her child, you merciful God, have mercy on her that she may quickly and easily
give birth without grief and pains, for the key of a woman in labor is after
all in your hand, and your mercy towards every creature is great, have mercy
on this woman, and may you see the tears which we are weeping and shedding for
her sake, and just as the gates of tears are not closed, and just as you
accepted the prayer of our patriarch Abraham when he prayed that his wife and
the servants of Elimelelch give birth to their children, and they gave birth
easily, though they were idolworshipers, and we have come before you, merciful
and gracious one, to plead that you have mercy on this Jewish woman who serves
you, merciful and gracious one, that you open her motherbody easily and
swiftly, without grief and pains, and just as you save all pious wives from
the curse of Eve, so may you also save this woman, and may she live long and
be a mother to the live child which she will now bear, and may she rear him
for Learning, Marriage and Good Deeds, and if she has, God forbid, sinned in
some way, accept her repentance, for after all you are close to every person
who calls to you truly and with all his heart, and when God forbid a person is
in greatest need, you are his helper, and by virtue of the good deeds of her
holy parents, and by virtue of our good deeds and by virtue of her good deeds,
accept our tears and weeping and prayers that we are offering for her sake,
and may you stop the mouths of all her critics who are critical of her, and
may you summon all those who speak favorably of her, and may we soon hear
sounds of joy and cheer in the room with the birth of the newborn child, amen:

***

Postscript:  I welcome comments and, especially, corrections of my
romanization.  Are the ungrammatical _dayne rakhmones zenen_ and _af di isho_
proof of an uneducated author?  We have become so aware of gender-linked
elements in language that we can hardly not look closely at the phrase
_ploynis-bas-ploynis_.  Could it indicate that the woman in labor is
identified matrilineally or is the phrase merely an idiomatic way of saying
"Mrs.  So-and-So"?  _bas-ploynis_ reminds one that metronymic surnames (family
names deriving from the mother's first name) are uncommon in Europe except
among Ashkenazic Jews (e.g., Bashevis, Beilin, Chanin, Rifkind, Sorkin).

Leonard Prager

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 5.305

