
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 3.334
April 27, 1994

1) Origins of eastern European Jews (Jules Levin)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun Apr 24 20:53:49 1994
From: JFLEVIN@UCRAC1.UCR.EDU
Subject: Origins of eastern European Jews

What the discussion on the origins of EE Jewry overlooks is the extreme
improbability that as dramatic an event as the disappearance of the
original Jews and their replacement by Slavic (or whatever) converts
could have been overlooked in the written culture of either the Christian
or Jewish cultures. (Or the Muslim, for that matter.)  We have enormous
quantities of written diaries, histories, treatises, etc., by travellers,
clerics, soldiers, not to mention a vast responsa literature.  Over much
of the past 1500 years, Christendom, both Eastern and Western, were
obsessed with the Jews, their theological significance, their faults,
their fate, etc.  No doubt was ever raised that the Jews in their midst,
whether in England, Kiev, or points between, were the very Jews
responsible for the Crucifixion.

I was happy to see that the last item re the exotic origins of Ashkenazic
Jewry settled the matter [hopefully] by citing genetic evidence
supporting the ethnic unity of kol yisroel.  This was the argument I made
to Ellen Prince, when I e-mailed her directly some time ago on this
question (I was new to e-mail and actually intended that to be a general
reply).  However, I believe there are still some important points to
bring out that I never saw in MENDELE.

	a.  The theory of the exotic origins of European Jewry is already
a weapon in the rhetorical armory of anti-semites and anti-zionists.
Theirs is a specific agenda--to de-legitimize the existence of the Jewish
people.  I quote from a letter published in the UCLA Daily Bruin of 3/14:
...A majority of the modern Jewish population constitute Oshkanazi [sic]
Jews who are European converts to Judaism.  People of Jewish religious
persuasion have diverse ethnicities such as Polish, Persian, Ethiopian,
and Argentinian.  If an individual decided to convert to Judaism, it
would not, or should not, entitle him to real estate in Israel... Zionism
is... based on fabricated religious grounds and has no place in the
democratic arena.  If you sincerely want to know what Zionism is, then
read "The Protocols of the Elders of Zion."..."  [signed]--Aria Razvar [a
senior majoring in linguistics and philosophy].

	b.  The original question was founded on utterly false premises.
One was that the territory east of Germany was Judenrein before the
eastern expansion of Rhineland Jews.  There is NO reason to believe that.
The Eastern Holy Roman Empire had a large ORIGINAL Jewish population
which did not disappear.  There were Jewish communities in the originally
Greek cities along the coast of the Black sea and everywhere in  the
Balkans.  There are plenty of references to Jews over all that time into
modern times.  Where did Peter the Great's Jewish advisor come from? Over
time this pre-existing population would have intermarried and merged
linguistically with the new immigrants from the west.

	c.  Another fallacy:  Why assume that the Jews of Palestine at
the turn of the era where phenotypically homogeneous?, i.e., all
black-eyed, black hair, short and swarthy?  The Jews then (already at
least HALF lived in the diaspora, by the way!) included the descendants
of converts, i.e., the Edomites, both groups and individuals, and even in
the exodus we had the 'mixed multitude'.  The notion of original
homogeneity leads to the next fallacy I saw in Mendele, that features
like paler skin and hair must constitute proof of exogenous origin.  I
read somewhere that only ten generations of natural selection can change
a population in significant ways, and before modern times there would
have been natural selection on Jews living in harsh northern climates, as
there was on the non-Jewish population.  Jews also, accepting local
standards of beauty, may over centuries have selected for paler skin and
lighter hair and eyes, as they reputedly selected for intellectuality in
males by providing the means for Talmud scholars to have lots of
children.

        d.  The next fallacy is that something like the mass conversion
of a Slavic or other population could have gone unrecorded.  There are
actually cases of group conversion, like the Czech Hussites who became
Jews when it was safer to be a Jew than a Protestant after the Catholic
reaction, and who apparently originally were planning to remain hidden
Christians!!  Alth ough their descendants are now actual Jews, they have
NOT forgotten this origin, which is my point.  Similarly, the
Turkic-origin converts to Karait Judaism brought back to Lithuania many
centuries ago remained a separate community with their own identity down
to the present, although they lived side-by-side with Jews, and at the
beginning of the 19th century shared a community hospitol and chevra
kadisha with misnagdim and hassidim in Vilna.  Thus the idea that
significant conversion could have taken place and been FORGOTTEN, much
less unrecorded, by the Jews themselves, displays lack of reflection on
this premise.  Along these lines, that the original authentic Jewish
population could have disappeared and been replaced by the descendents of
converts, in Europe filled with Christian observers, diaryists,
historians, theologians, priests, and similar, many of them obsessed with
the Jews and their significance, defies all reason.

	e.  This leads to another notion articulated in MENDELE, that
cantonists with "Asian war-brides" could have introduced the epenthetic
fold into the Jewish population.  Several errors here:  The purpose of
the 25 year draft was to sever these recruits from Judaism forever, and
indeed many converted.  After a lifetime of army pork it was hard to go
back to the shtetl.  Did they have intercourse with local women where
they were stationed?  No doubt.  Did they marry non-Jewish women?  No
doubt. Did they ever bring their non-Jewish brides back to their home
villages and convert them?  In Russian Orthodox Russia?  Please!  Rather
than look for their descendents among us, look for distinguished probosci
and a passion for herring in central Asia.  Of course, some cantonists
against all odds kept the faith.  The Jewish community of Finland was
started by cantonists who remained there after discharge, AND WHO SENT
BACK TO THEIR HOME VILLAGES IN LITHUANIA FOR THEIR WIVES!

	f.  Lest I be called a racist by the politically correct Mendel-
nicks, let me make it clear that I have no problem with the IDEA of
people of various ethnic groups converting to Judaism; given the
inbreeding of EE Jewry (of which I myself am a victim), MORE conversion
and not less would have been welcome.  And of course, as was pointed out,
there was always intercourse taking place between Jews and non-Jews.  But
given the REALITY of Jewish life, both the internal reality of halachah
and the external reality of the pressures from the Gentile world meant
that the vast majority of progeny of interethnic coupling would have
joined the GENTILE world, NOT become part of EE Jewry! Thank you for your
patience.

--Jules Levin

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 3.334

A Table of Contents is now available via anonymous ftp, along with weekly
updates.

Anonymous ftp archives available on:
          ftp.mendele.trincoll.edu
          in the directory pub/mendele/files

Archives available via gopher on:
        gopher.cic.net

Mendele has 2 rules:

	1. Provide a meaningful Subject: line.
	2. Sign your article.

To subscribe, send SUB MENDELE FIRSTNAME LASTNAME to:

                   LISTSERV@YALEVM.YCC.YALE.EDU

Send submissions/responses to:
        mendele@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

Other business:
        nmiller@starbase.trincoll.edu


