
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 6.100
November 20, 1996

1) Kalekh hakn (Yude-Leyb Prager)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 19 Nov 96 12:02:17 IST
From: rhle302@uvm.haifa.ac.il
Subject: Kalekh hakn

_kalekh hakn_ 'pounding lime' or 'making chicken-breast balls in
broth'

One of the great pleasures of a Mendelyaner is dialogue with serious and
knowledgeable respondents.  How fortunate we are to have an Eliyahu Juni
to deepen our discussions!  I want to talk now about Reb Eliyohu's
(Elye's?) comments (in _Mendele_ vol6.097) on my translation of
"Khaye-Leye gut shabes" (in _Mendele_ vol6.093).  When I worked on this
song several years ago I agonized over two questions:  1) how to explain
the female speaker's assertion of going to the mikve erev-shabes when
this seemed historically unlikely, and 2) how to explain the words
_kalekh hakn_ sandwiched in between two references to preparing food.
Reb Eliyohu's suggestion that the author of the song was out of touch
with the mikve culture satisfactorily explains the first question -- the
author was inaccurate here.

But all the other references in the song seem quite realistic, including
_kalekh hakn_.  I first thought it referred to preparing some food and
searched in all the dictionaries, thesauri, glossaries, Yiddish language
journals I own; I also queried all the Yiddish speakers I knew. And the
best I could come up with was 'chopping/pounding lime'.  (One doesn't
have to be dependent on Uriel Weinreich's splendid dictionary to find
_kalkh_, sometimes also spelled _kalekh_, rendered 'lime; chalk' -- it
doesn't seem to be translated any other way anywhere.)

Reb Eliyohu suggests a secondary sense of _kalekh_, which he gives as
_kaalekh_, namely 'chopped chicken breasts (Yiddish _beylik_) formed
into balls resembling gefilte fish and cooked in a broth'.  He recalls
this dish as his Minkatsher grandmother prepared it.  Could it be a
regional dish and its name a regional or even local one?  We sometimes
forget how large the Yiddish lexicon is.  No one can hope to master the
total vocabulary even of a single variety of Yiddish.  Food names
require a linguistic atlas of their own.  Saltshe Vayznfraynd was
Polish-born and her London audience were mainly Polish- and
Ukrainian-born.  Would they have recognized _kalekh_ 'balls of chopped
chicken breast in broth'?  Moreover, does the verb _hakn_ fit here?  One
would _hak fleysh_, but would one _hak_ the dish made from a particular
kind of meat?  One reason for _hakn_ is that it rhymes with _bakn_, but
it must surely be appropriate when bound to _kalekh_.

There are two arguments in support of _kalekh hakn_ 'chopping/pounding
lime'. The speaker lists domestic chores in a random, rushed, somewhat
hectic fashion that makes placing a non-cooking task between two cooking
ones apposite.  Moreover, a typical shtetl chore was the whitewashing of
the stove and other walls.  Apparently the woman of the household was
sometimes responsible for this activity and it may have been carried out
at least a few times in the year.  Students of domestic life in the
shtetl will be delighted to read the marvelous essay by Shoyl Hurvits
"In mayn mames kikh" (_Yidishe shprakh_ 12:4 (1952), 114-118).  The
Yiddish here is from the Minsk region, i.e.  Northeastern Yiddish, which
fact helped me comfort myself for not recognizing a large part of the
kitchen terminology (I am not a Litvak).

At the very beginning of Hurvits's description we read:  "Dem same
oybnon un di gresere helft fun der kikh hot farnumen der tsigl-oyvn.  Di
mame aleyn flegt farkalkhn di farreykherte un shmutsike erter fun oyvn,
un erev peysekh hot der mulyer im ibergekalkht in gantsn."  ('The main
and larger half of the kitchen was taken up by the brick oven.  My
mother used to whitewash the blackened and dirty places on the oven by
herself and just before Passover the bricklayer whitewashed the entire
oven.')  Presumably the lime for the whitewash was caked and had to be
pounded into powder before mixing with water, i.e.  _kalekh hakn_.  (I
have whitewashed a lot of walls but admittedly using a prepared powder
which I simply mixed with water.  Any notions I may have about preparing
lime for whitewashing are imaginary constructions, open to correction
from anyone who is actually a _maven_ in this area.)

Feygl Melamdovitsh loved Hurvits' article and wrote a one-page addendum
entitled "Fun a kikh in Byalistok" (_Yidishe sphrakh_ 13:1 (1953), 25).
Byalistok is not all that far from Hurvits' Berezin, geographically or
linguistically, yet the author provides over two dozen common kitchen
terms which differed in the two places.  Writing almost half a century
ago, Feygl M. communicates her fascination with terms whose charm lies
in their distinctly local or regional character, not to mention their
associations with home and family:  "Geleyent di arbet fun Shoyl Hurvits
... un hob ongekvoln fun fargenign.  Aza heymishkeyt, aza shlal
folksverter -- es hot mikh poshet opgefrisht.  Es hot a vey geton
mameshkeyt.  / Baym leyenen hob ikh fartseykhnt a tsol zakhn vos hobn ba
undz in Byalistok gehat andere nemen in farglaykh mit di vos Sh. Hurvits
git on fun zayn mames kikh."

As Heine and others have pointed out, Jewish food has the power to
arouse nostalgic feelings even in the most assimilated.  But "Jewish
food" covers a large map.  I never even heard of _kaalekh_ (but I will
certainly try these chicken-breast balls if someone will send me the
recipe), which perhaps is a regional dish known only to Hungarian Jews.
Perhaps there is some data in the linguistic atlas that can help us
here. Again, let me say I have no vested interest in lime deposits and
no desire to whitewash any lexicographic plonters I may have committed.
We need to know more.

Leonard (Yude-Leyb) Prager

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 6.100

