Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 1 no. 151
January 28, 1992
 
1) Ludic Yiddish (Yude-Leyb Proger)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 26 Jan 92 12:23:26 IST
From: leonard prager <RHLE302@HAIFAUVM.BITNET>
Subject: ludic yiddish

 
 
                      Ludic Yiddish (Note One)
 
             by Yude-Leyb Proger (Leonard Prager), Haifa
 
 
As Yiddish as an everyday language declines among
non-ultra-Orthodox Ashkenazim, its LUDIC uses are stressed
at the expense of others.(1) Most ludic users of Yiddish
are now in their fifties and sixties, were born in Ashkenaz
3 to parents born in Ashkenaz 2, recall bits and pieces of
spoken Yiddish, know little Yiddish grammar ("dos froy,"
"di mentsh"), and introduce New-High-Germanisms and
Anglicisms into the sparse Yiddish they do know (the jokes
given below had to be rewritten from "Yiddish" into
Yiddish).  The phenomenon of ludic Yiddish -- which can
also be thought of as the phenomenon of pseudo-Yiddish --
is mainly, but not exclusively, American (cf. the "humor"
of the borsht belt).  One of its high priests is Leo
Rosten, whose best-selling _Joys of Yiddish_ and _Hooray
for Yiddish_, besides perpetuating numerous factual errors,
have packaged pseudo-Yiddish and pseudo-Yiddish culture as
a great American fun sensation. Ludic Yiddish is one of
several signs of the decline of Yiddish language and
culture in Ashkenaz 3.  Sadly, ludic users of Yiddish think
they are continuing traditional Yiddish humor, but the
humor is often pseudo-humor just as the language is often
pseudo-Yiddish.
 
No longer a realistic competitor to Hebrew, Yiddish is
indulged in certain ways, but this indulgence conceals a
deep-rooted ambivalence. As regards jokes, many Israeli
Ashkenazim believe that {Heb.} :cit.beyidish ze matschik
yoter:ecit. 'It's funnier in Yiddish'.  We thus find jokes
being retold in Yiddish which do not appear to have been
conceived in Yiddish.  Since Yiddish is associated with the
Diaspora, which official Zionist ideology proscribes,
telling jokes in Yiddish to other Israelis who understand
Yiddish may have a special "underground" appeal.  On a f I
have heard some very raunchy Yiddish "jokes" in Israel,
which their tellers might not have allowed themselves to
tell in Hebrew -- but since Yiddish is the domain of humor,
anything goes.(2)
 
The ambivalence of so-called "folklore" evenings of Yiddish
humor consists of both the positive appreciation of the
formidable linguistic (including gestural and mimetic)
resources of Yiddish for the expression of humor, as well
as the sense that the "world" of that humor is "they" and
not me.(3) Since much humor at bottom is aggressive and
implies superiority of the teller over the joke's victims,
this they-me opposition is reinforced in the un-Yiddish
Yiddish joke.  On the other hand, it is interesting that
some Israelis feel that these jokes had to be told in
Yiddish.(4) Many jokes circulate in Hebrew and one can
always at least try to translate any joke _into_ Hebrew.
The people who told me these jokes heard them in Yiddish
and regarded them as "Yiddish jokes," jokes whose flavor is
in the telling as much as in the content.  This
listening-to-Yiddish experience for them contained some
element of nostalgia and, also, of appreciation of the
Yiddish language.
 
The first of the following jokes is crudely sexist and
though it involves an element of surprize, it lacks the
play of language or wit.  The second joke is disguised
aggression against a supposedly witless woman ("a yidene"),
but there is humor in the sudden conjunction of the
ordinary (sending messages) and the aweful (the mystery of
death and the afterlife), a domestication of Death by plain
speech.  The joke has a fresh flavor owing to the
stockmarket reference and seems more aimed at releasing
financial than war anxieties -- both are real.
 
The third joke is the only one of the three which Freud and
other students of Jewish humor might have regarded as
characteristically Jewish and the only one which seems
fully at home in Yiddish. Nonetheless, many non-Jews will
appreciate the joke, since it can be understood in a number
of ways.  Jews (but not all Jews) will see it as a
burlesque of Jewish lugubriousness in general, and of the
pervasive memorializing in Israeli culture in particular.
The joke inverts the well known Yiddish expression, "af
simkhes" 'on happy occasions {may we meet}', which is often
heard among Jews (not only in Israel) at celebrative
occasions where members of families or groups who seldom
see one another have a chance to do so.  This formula
(whose Hebrew token is _besmachot_) is a kind of talisman
against such sad causes for clan gatherings as funerals.
The inversion suggests that modern life has so isolated
people and has so torn asunder communal and familial ties
that even unhappy events like funerals, which affirm those
ties, provide a needed emotional lift.  The joke may also
point to unconscious pleasure at the death of others due to
a feeling of superiority at having outlived them.  The fact
that the deceased is a relative points to the family
complex, source of love and hate.  The logical implication
is that the closer the relationship of the deceased, the
"better" it is for the mourner, i.e., "better" means
"worse."
 
    Three Israeli Yiddish Cemetery Jokes (December 1987)
 
At a Chanuka "folklore" evening at Bet Biram (Haifa) in
December 1987, a young Israeli woman told jokes in Yiddish
and translated them into Hebrew. They do not appear to be
original Yiddish jokes, although a Yiddish garb has added
something to their delivery.  Sara Gilead retold the jokes
to me.
 
 
                 1.  Z'hot zikh nisht gelozt
 
Tsvey bakante bagegenen zikh un eyner dertseylt dem
tsveytn: "Kh'hob nor vos bagrobn mayn vayb olevesholem."
Shrayt der tsveyter, "Oy vey! geferlekh!  Ober zog mir, far
vos bistu azoy farshvartst un farblutikt?"  Enfert der
ershter, "Z'hot zikh nisht gelozt!"

{She Resisted: A man bumps into a friend and tells him,
"I've just buried my wife."  "Oh, that's terrible!" cries
the friend. "But tell me," he asks, "why are you so soiled
and blood-stained?" "She resisted," he replied.}
 
 
                       2.  Me geyt aleyn!
 
 
A yidene shteyt afn bes-oylem  --  a bes-oylem vi ale
bes-oylems iz es ober nisht, dos heyst nisht ka bes-oylem
far mentshn, khas-vekholile, nor lehavdl a bes-oylem far
khayes (ir zolt visn zayn az in amerike feln nisht azelkhe
bes-oylems) -- un zi yomert un makht yeloles. Zi veynt mit
trern s'harts ken tsegeyn. Di trern rinen fun ponim un af a
hoykhn kol baklogt zi un ruft oys, "Hintele, hintele, zay a
meylets-yoysher far mir un far der gantser mishpokhe.  Bet,
s'zol zayn sholem in erets-isroel, s'zol zikh shoyn nemen a
sof dortn tsu di milkhomes, me zol ufhern hargenen undzere
yidn.  Un nokh epes, hintele, bet got er zol farshtarkn di
tel-oviver berze un di prayzn zoln zikh haltn."  Nisht vayt
fun der yidene shteyt a yid un er hert vi zi shrayt un bet.
Geyt er tsu un shushket ir in oyer arayn:  "Yidene, far
azelkhe toyves shikt men nisht ka  hunt -- me geyt aleyn!"

{You go yourself!: A woman was standing in a cemetery --
not, mind you, an ordinary cemetery, one for people (God
forbid!), but an animal cemetery (there are such places in
America) and she wailed and lamented and it was enough to
break your heart to hear her.  She wept buckets and cried
out, "Doggie, doggie, ask God to give me and my family good
health.  And let there be peace in Israel, no more wars,
let there be an end to killing Jews! Also, dear doggie, ask
God to keep the Tel-Aviv stock market strong and prices
steady.  A man standing nearby, who heard her cries, went
over and whispered in her ear, "Missus, for such favors you
don't send a dog, you go yourself!"}
 
 
                  3a.  S'iz beser vi gornisht
 
 
Eyner a yid treft zayns a khaver un dertseylt em, az er iz
ersht geven af a korevs levaye.  Enfert em der khaver,
-- "Nisht s'vayb, kholile!"
-- "Neyn, neyn, nisht s'vayb!"
-- "Un nisht kholile der zun!"
-- "Neyn, neyn, nisht der zun un nisht di tokhter un nisht
di eyniklekh!"
-- "Az ver?" fregt der khaver.
-- "Geshtorbn iz mayn plimeniks a shvesterkinds a shviger."
-- "Nu," enfert der khaver, "s'iz beser vi gornisht."

{That's Better Than Nothing: A man met an old friend and
told him that he had just been to the funeral of a
relative.  "Not your wife, God forbid!" cried out the
friend.  "Oh no," he answered.  "Not your daughter, God
forbid!," cried the friend.  "Oh no," he answered.  "Not
your son, God forbid!"  "Oh no," he answered.  "Then who?"
cried the friend, "who?" "It was my nephew's cousin's
mother-in-law." "Well, answered the friend, "that's better
than nothing."}
 
 
                     3b.  S'iz beser vi gornisht
 
(I heard this variant of 3a. from Harry Hiller {Haifa}
on 28 December 1987.  He had heard it from Ted Friedman {Haifa}.)
 
Eyner a yid shteyt afn bes-oylem ban a frishn keyver un
veynt un shrayt az er hot gekont ufvekn a toytn fun yener
velt mit zayne gevaldn. Geyt tsu im tsu a yid un fregt mit
gefil. "S'vayb?"  "Neyn," enfert der ovl.  "A kind,
kholile?", fregt der mentsh vayter.  "Neyn, oykh nisht ka
kind," enfert der ovl.  "Az ver?" fregt der mentsh, ver?"
-- "Geshtorbn iz mayn eydims a bruders a shvesterkinds a
plimenik." "Nu," entfert der mentsh, "s'iz beser vi
gornisht."

{That's Better Than Nothing: A mourner stood by a fresh
grave and wept and screamed so that his cries could have
woken the dead. A bystander approached him and gently
asked, "Your wife?"  "No," said the mourner, "not my wife."
"Not a child, God forbid?" asked the man. "No", the mourner
replied, "not a child."  "Then who?" he asked, "who?" "My
son-in-law's brother's cousin's nephew died." "Well,
answered the man, "that's better than nothing."}
 
 
                              Endnotes
 
1).  The term _ludic_ in this context was first used by
David L. Gold.
 
2)   Yiddish is simultaneously the domain of the obverse of
the funny, namely the unctuously ('shmaltsy') sentimental.
Food is a large segment of this compartment.  In ludic
Yiddish, funny or food cover most cases.
 
3)   Non-Hebrew-language ethnic cultural events in Israel
are made acceptable in public by being placed under the
rubric of _folklore_.  _Folklore_ may be quaint, but it is
not quite _culture_.  The Histadrut in Haifa includes
"Haagaf letarbut, khinukh vehaskala," which in turn
includes "Hamoadon lesifrut ulefolklor."  The latter has
for many years sponsored Yiddish cultural events in
Yiddish, always somehow coupled with the licensing word
_folklor_, which somehow neutralizes the too prestigious
_literatur_.
 
4)   Simultaneous with ludicization there has been, both in
Israel and in the Diaspora, an ongoing revaluation and
subsequent renewed appreciation for Yiddish culture and its
treasures.  This seems to be related to the strength of
Hebrew, the decline of Yiddish, the academicization of
Yiddish, the recognition of Yiddish by non-Jews (Nobel
Prizes for Bashevis, Wiesel), the spread of Jewish English
(especially via the entertainment media), but mostly to
genuine nostalgia.

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol 1.151
 
