
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 5.261
March 5, 1996

1) Sholem-Aleykhem's _Kenig Pik_ (Part 1) (Leonard Prager)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 13 Feb 96 21:42:39 IST
From: rhle302@uvm.haifa.ac.il
Subject: Sholem-Aleykhem's _Kenig Pik_

[Mendele is happy to present the first of five installments of a fascinating
paper by our old friend Yude-Leyb Prager of Haifa.  The endnotes will appear
in two subsequent installments.  nm]

                                  1

While a minor work in the Sholem-Aleykhem canon _Kenig Pik_ hardly deserves
the oblivion to which it has been consigned.(2) Indeed, even Sholem-Aleykhem
specialists may have little more than a vague notion of the play.  Zalmen
Zilbertsvayg, in a brief notice in his _Leksikon fun yidishn teater_ (New
York, 1963, 4:3388) augmented the impression of slightness by reporting that
no translations or performances were known.(3) The fact that Y.-D.
Berkovitsh, the humorist's son-in-law, dld not record, much less describe, all
editions in his _Sholem-aleykhem-bukh_ (New York, 1926) and, more importantly,
did not include the author's revised edition of the play in the Collected
Works (Folksfond-oysgabe), further accounts for the play's neglect.

My awareness of _Kenig Pik_ dates from the moment a colleague, David
Goodblatt, showed me a manuscript copy of the play which had belonged to his
father and which he believed might be in Sholem-Aleykhem's own hand. The
manuscript is a 21-by-15-cm. graph-paper notebook made in Genoa, Italy.  The
light green back cover (whlch became the front cover) has a printed
multiplication table; the Itallan word _quaderno_ ('copybook') is printed on
the front cover.(4) This is precisely what this manuscript is, a _copybook_.
Before I say any more about the manuscript and the play, I would llke to say
somethlng about copying.

Sholem-Aleykhem supported himself and a large family by his writing and by
occaslonal readings.  He needed to sell his stories and feullletons to as many
periodicals as would buy.  He simultaneously wrote for newspapers and journals
in Warsaw, New York, Johannesburg and a great many other cities.  He sometimes
employed a copyist and by 1910 he was typing his own work.  He was often
helped by his son-in-law, Y.-D. Berkovitsh, in editing, copying and
distributing his manuscripts.(5) In 1910 Berkovltsh was working as literary
editor of Mortkhe Spektor's _Di naye velt_ (The New World) in Warsaw, later
that year moving to Vilna. >From these cities he forwarded Sholem-Aleykhem's
manuscripts to domestic and foreign papers.  We can follow this activity
closely by consulting the relevant letters in the Sholem-Aleykhem Archives.(6)

On November 16/29 (old and new style), 1910, Sholem-Aleykhem, in a postcard
(in Russian) from Nervi, Italy, directed Berkovitsh to copy _Kenig Pik_ and
send it to the Unlted States, but to hold up sending a copy to the Warsaw _Der
moment_.  The "barbarians" of _Der moment_, he feared, were capable of
printing the feuilleton, a Chanuka piece, before the holiday.  That would not
do.  He had written to _Der moment_ that it could announce the feuilleton
then, but he would send it in just before the holiday.  He further informed
Berkovitsh that he was writing another feuilleton, _Zeks-un-zekhtsik_
('Sixty-Six'), which he would offer to -Der moment_ in the event _Kenig Pik_
were rejected.(7)

Another letter to Berkovitsh from Sholem-Aleykhem on November 25, 1910 tells
us that the Russian-language Jewish Journal _Rassvet_ ('Dawn') had asked
Sholem-Aleykhem for a feuilleton with a Chanuka flavor for a holiday issue.
It was willing to receive a Yiddish text and translate it into Russian for its
fifteen thousand readers.  Berkovitsh sent -Rassvet_ a copy of _Kenig Pik_ and
it was published in No. 9 (1911) under the altered title 'Three Ladies'.(8)
Besides informing us about the Russian translation in _Rassvet_,
Sholem-Aleykhem's letters to Berkovitsh of the period also shed light on the
humorist's unsuccessful efforts to publish _Kenig Pik_ in Hebrew.

-Hatsefira_ was interested In recelving a story from Sholem-Aleykhem, who
asked Berkovitsh to offer _Kenig Pik_ to thls prestigious Hebrew perlodical.
Sholem-Aleykhem regarded the play as a cheerful piece of writing and betrayed
no doubts as to its appropriateness for _Hatsefira_.  But Berkovitsh told his
father-in-law that the Yiddish play would lose its _smisl_ (Russian 'sense';
'purport') in Hebrew. Surprisingly, Sholem-Aleykhem did not understand this
reaction.

Sholem-Aleykhem was too itinerant and harassed to keep careful records and we
find hlm 1n December 1910 asking Berkovitsh whether he had the original
manuscript of _Kenig plk_.  He wanted to compare it to the Purim feuilleton he
was working on (the future _Shrage_).  At the same time that Berkovitsh was
helping hls father-in-law to place his writings in Yiddish periodicals in
Poland, New York Yiddish Journalist Yankev Faler was assisting across the
Atlantic.  On December 5, 1910, Sholem-Aleykhem wrote to Faler:  "Ikh shtel
mir for vos far a kashe mit a borsht un mit lokshn ba aykh tut zikh itst mit
mayne dray felyetonen: 1) Kasrilevke, 2) Kenig Pik, 3) A zeks-un-zekhtsik.  Ir
vet mir nit shtark sheltn?"  ('I can well imagine what a pandemonium I've
created with my three feullletons:  1) Kasrilevke, 2) King of Spades, 3)
Sixty-six.  You won't curse me, will you?'(9)

It was not pleasant for Sholem-Aleykhem to remind his unpaid agent that he was
dependent on periodicals for his livelihood.  In 1911 he was writing for at
least five New York Yiddlsh papers and the logistics of thls operation was not
always smooth.  Confusion arose as to the placing of _Kenlg pik_.  It had
originally been intended for Barondes's _Yidish folk_ ('Jewish People').  On
December 19 (old style), 1910, Sholem-Aleykhem wrote to Berkovitsh to send
Barondes a copy of _Kenig pik_.  This appears to have been the second copy
that was sent to New York.  Sholem-Aleykhem was an industrlous correspondent,
but perhaps not a completely organized one . On December 8, 1910 he had
acknowledged receipt of a clean and apparently edited copy of _Kenig Pik_ from
Berkovitsh, expressing great delight in hls son-1n-law's substitution of the
loshn-koydesh _slicho_ ('forgiveness') (cf.  Y. _slikhe_, ModH. _selicha_) for
his original _entshuldikt_ ('excuse me.')  Berkovitsh was editor, amanuensis
and agent.(10)

But Sholem-Aleykhem was also hisown editor, amanuensis and agent.  On January
15, 1910, he wrote to Berkovitsh that he had almost doubled the size of _Kenig
Pik_ and was sending it to _Der groyser kundes_ ('The Big Joker') in New York.
The day before, Sholem-Aleykhem had written to Faler that he was glad that
_Kenig Pik_ was not to appear in the periodical for which it had originally
been intended, that he had revised and lengthened the play and that it would
appear elsewhere in New York.  He requested return of the manuscript.  Copies,
after all, were worth something and had to be accounted for.

Leonard Prager

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 5.261

Mendele has 2 rules:

	1. Provide a meaningful Subject: line
	2. Sign your article (full name please)

Send articles to:
    mendele@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

Send change-of-status messages to:
    listserv@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

        a. For a temporary stop: set mendele nomail
        b. To resume delivery: set mendele mail
        c. To subscribe: sub mendele first_name last_name
        d. To unsubscribe kholile: unsub mendele

Other business:
    nmiller@mail.trincoll.edu

              ****Getting back issues****

1. Anonymous ftp archives are available.

ftp ftp.mendele.trincoll.edu
    in the directory pub/mendele/files

    A table of contents is also available, along with weekly updates.

2. Mendele archives can also be reached as follows:

via WWW:
    http://sunsite.unc.edu/yiddish/mewais.html

via gopher:
    gopher://sunsite.unc.edu/11/../.pub/academic/languages/yiddish/mendele

via ftp:
    ftp://sunsite.unc.edu/pub/academic/languages/yiddish/mendele





