
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 4.394
April 20, 1995

1) Zanvel Aronson (Zellig Bach)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 19 Apr 1995 15:14:51 -0400
From: zellig@aol.com
Subject: The night when Zanvel Aronson was knighted

A mayse lekoved peysakh.  Oyb s'iz tsu shpet far the di ershte teg
peysakh, iz zol es zayn far di tsveyte teg peysakh.  Kh'vintsh der
gantser Mendele familye, un unzer rosh ha'khavruse, Noyekh Milern,  a
gut, zis yor mit gezunt un freyd!

Zanvel Aronson, the British industrialist and philanthropist, sat at his
desk that Saturday morning, going over his voluminous private mail. A
corner of one particular letter caught his eye, and he pulled it out from
the rest of the mail. Its size and color were special, the paper quality
luxurious. The sender's address read:  Buckingham Palace, London XXVIII,
and it bore the royal seal.

Zanvel's heartbeat speeded up several measures, and he suddenly became
aware of his own breathing.  Disregarding the urging of his curiosity, he
opened the letter with much deliberation, savoring to the full the
experience of anticipation.

He read it slowly, word for word.  His eyes welled up with warm tears,
and a boundless joy engulfed his entire being.

Memories started to flood his mind...  He arrived in London in 1922, all
alone, a poor boy from Pilvishok, a shtetl in Lithuania...  His valuables
consisted of a single note of five British pounds, and the pride of his
craftsmanship -- his professional tailor scissors, a gift from his father
who taught him his trade...  The two trustees of the Hebrew Free Loan
Society who not only approved his loan application for a sewing machine
but advanced him an additional sum of three months rent for his new
venture... His first customer, a Mr. Ian McCullough, a teacher of English
history in a private school...

When Mr. McCullough tried on, at the final fitting, his custom-made
three-piece suit and his overcoat, Zanvel stepped back several steps, the
better to appreciate, in the right perspective, his art work.  His tape
measure suspended from his shoulders, he partly closed his eyes, turned
his head slightly, first one way, then the other, and judged it
excellent.

Out of joy Zanvel pressed upon his first customer a woolen muffler
(scarf) to go with the overcoat.  Mr. McCullough insisted on paying for
it, but Zanvel adamantly refused, saying that the accessory enhanced his
work and made him very happy.

Years later, when Zanvel Aronson went into mass production of
ready-to-wear menswear, he followed that first impulse and made it a
popular sales slogan "a free muffler with every overcoat," a hallmark of
his ever widening and flourishing business.  With the outbreak of World
War II he received large government orders for uniforms in all branches
of the military services, and his factories were repeatedly singled out
for special commendations for promptness and efficiency.

He stopped short the memory images and called his wife on the intercom:
"Malke, please come in."

His wife's name was Mildred, but in their courting days he called her
"Malke" (Hebrew and Yiddish for Queen), and in affectionate and emotional
moments he reverted to addressing her by this special name.

When she came into his studio, he handed her the letter. She read:  "Her
Majesty, Queen Elizabeth II, Requests the Honour of the Presence of Mr.
Zanvel Aronson on Commonwealth Day, May 24, at 5:00 P.M. sharp, for his
Investiture as a Knight in the Order of the British Empire in Recognition
of his Beneficence and Magnanimity of Heart..."

They embraced and kissed, and with tears in her voice she said:  "If only
your and my parents were still alive..."

Zanvel Aronson followed the moral precepts of his teachers.  As his
manufacturing businesses prospered, he made large contributions to local
charities and to national organizations with increasing frequency and
ever increasing amounts.  His heart and purse were open and responsive,
and his generosity became known throughout Great Britain and the
Commonwealth.

The wide-ranging charitable Foundation he established was a genuine
expression of his compassion for the sick and needy, the hungry and
afflicted.  There was also an admixture of his gratitude to England, his
host nation, a small return for all the benevolence it proffered him.

On the eve of the investiture Zanvel and his wife had dinner at home with
a few close friends, among them Zanvel's first customer, Mr. McCullough,
with whom he developed a lasting friendship.

After dinner Mrs. Aronson brought out the family album, snapshots of
children and grandchildren, photographs of parents and grandparents. The
pictures taken long ago in Lithuania wee yellowed.  One showed Zanvel's
family -- his mother and father, his five sisters, and himself, a little
boy, about eight or nine years old.

The pictures evoked in him memories of holidays at home, especcially of
Peysakh, the festive mood, the elaborate meals of the first and second
seyders, all family members around the table in their holiday best, and
his father at the head of the table wearing a white yarmulke and a solemn
white linen _kitl_ (robe), propped up according to tradition with pillows
for this special occasion, as befits a king...

As the only male child, it was his, Zanvel's, privilege to ask at both
seyders the _ fir kashes_ the traditional four questions in the
_hago'de_, each one starting with the words "ma nishtano ha'laylo ha'ze"
(how is this night different), and his father intoning each time in a
joyous voice the answer "this night is different from all other
nights..." and retell the glorious story about the exodus of the children
of Israel from their slavery in Egypt.

"Zanvel," his wife suggested, "why don't you show our guests your regal
garb for tomorrows event?"

He gladly obliged.  He was very proud of his work -- he himself selected
the colors and color combinations, every stich, every piece of embroidery
done by his own hands, the design copied from an old book on heraldry
which his friend McCullough brought him.

When he came out from his dressing room, all smiles, his guests were
practically speechless in their praise, but Mr. McCullough came up with
the right words. "Every inch a Knight," he quoted Shakespeare , and then
added: "My dear Zanvel, Chaucer had the true description for you -- 'A
very parfit (perfect) gentil Knight' indeed."

The following late afternoon he rode in full regalia in an open
horse-drawn carriage to his investiture.  It was a sunny day, aand some
people in the street, having read and heard of the great royal event,
smiled and applauded.

The high-ceilinged hall was full of people to be initiated in the many
different Orders of the British empire, all dressed in respelendent
vestments of a veritable rainbow of colors -- crimson red and deep green,
mustard brown and bright yellow, Indian pink and azure blue, heliotrope
and burgundy... A shaft of soft sunlight came through the windows and
added shimmer and lustre to the pageantry.

Presently a drum roll was heard and trumpeters dressed in red tunics
blared a fanfare.  The ceremony started.

Each of the assembled moved slowly, presented himself to the Queen, and
gave his oath, in Elizabethan English, to always serve proudly the
interests of the Commonwealth.

Zanvel knew the words of the oath by heart.  He had rehearsed them many
times, in silence and aloud.  But as he approached the moment of his
ennoblement a mild shudder came over him, he felt awestruck, and his hear
became faint.  Suddenly he could not remember a single phrase, the
Elizabethan English completely escaped him.  For the span of a hearbeat
he suddenly remembered the Passover ceremonies at home, of which he spoke
just the evening before, and totally unaware, as if unconscious, uttered
in place of the oath the beginning words of the four seyder questions --
"ma nishtano ha'laylo ha'ze"...

The Queen turned to her Prince Consort and whispered:  "This Knight is
different from all other Knights..."

Zellig Bach
_________________
Copyright 1995, reprinted with permission (The _Forward_, 4/14/89).

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 4.394

Mendele has 2 rules:

	1. Provide a meaningful Subject: line
	2. Sign your article (full name please)

A Table of Contents is now available via anonymous ftp, along with weekly
updates.

Anonymous ftp archives available on:
          ftp.mendele.trincoll.edu
          in the directory pub/mendele/files

Archives available via gopher on:
        gopher.cic.net

Send articles to:
        mendele@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

Send change-of-status messages to:
        listserv@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

        a. For a temporary stop: set mendele nomail
        b. To resume delivery: set mendele mail
        c. To subscribe: sub mendele first_name last_name
        d. To unsubscribe kholile: unsub mendele

Other business:
        nmiller@mail.trincoll.edu



