
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 3.091
August 24, 1993

The shames would greatly appreciate your cooperation in
these small matters:

If your message is intended for MENDELE, please write to:

                 mendele@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

If you want to discuss personal business, please write to:

                 nmiller@starbase.trincoll.edu

Please provide a Subject: line.

Please sign your articles.

A dank.

1) YIVO and Southern Yiddish (Nissen Goldberg)
2) Dos un yents (Dovid Braun)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date:Mon Aug 23 20:40:18 1993
From: xidak!poseidon!bob@uunet.UU.NET (Robert N. Goldberg)
Subject: YIVO and Southern Yiddish

To clarify my point about the older orthography, I'm not saying we
should go back to it, merely that the "extra" letters sometimes
served a useful purpose.  The fact that the extra letters did not
ALWAYS guide pronunciation and were based on German orthography was
a good reason to clean up and standardize the spelling, but not a
justification for adopting a minimalist spelling standard for
Yiddish.

Question about YIVO to our YIVO experts: How do you represent a long
"o" sound in YIVO transliteration?  I'm thinking of how to
distinguish the Yiddish word for "mouth" from the Yiddish
pronunciation of the Hebrew word moel.  My grandmother referred to
her mouth as "man mOl" (where I use capital "O" for a long "o"), and
the moel as a "moyl".  I realize there's no problem in YIVO
orthography because the latter is spelled in Hebrew, but how would I
write my grandmother's southern dialect in YIVO transliteration?

To Dave Sherman, re: Oyfn pripetshik: we (my family) sings it
"kumets alef u".  It rhymes that way and reflects the most common
pronunciation of komets aleph in sefardish ("southern") Yiddish.
The number of exceptions to the rule is small compared to the number
of times it works for southern Yiddish.  So do teach it to your
children that way!

By the way, "kumets alef = u" also works for the southern European
pronunciation of Hebrew.  In my grandparents' shtibl, I heard such
things as "burikh atu ... hu-oylam" and "v'imri umayn", which
reflect "kumets alef = u", "vov = i", and Hebrew long O = "oy"
(which makes its way into STANDARD YIDDISH words like "oysyes").

My unsubstantiated gut feeling is that mmodern Yiddish orthography
reflects both a distancing from German (which I approve of) and rank
chauvinism against the southern dialects of Yiddish (which I find
insulting). vegn dos ikh vil epes fun di YIVO meyvns heren.

Bob "Nissen" Goldberg

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue Aug 24 01:39:18 1993
From: David Braun <braund@babel.ling.upenn.edu>
Subject: dos un yents

A por inyonim:

1. To Paul Ritterband:  please give my regards to your wife, my
former high school principal.

2. David Sherman:  Ask shver-un-shviger how they were taught.  I'll
bet they were actually taught "pasekh-alef [a], kumets-alef [u]".
The fcat fact that you sing it (and Surele sings it and maybe your
in-laws too) with [o] is because that's how it's most commonly sung.
So there should be no problem.

3. Yiddish folksingers often break rhymes (or what look like they
were originally meant by the original songwriter) to be rhymes.  Not
just in folksongs -- in counting-out rhymes, etc.  Take, for
instance, a song I recorded from my grandmother (it's in Prilutski's
early collections), which starts out:

	a mol iz geven azoy un azoy
	a man hot avekgeforn a yunge froy.

This is a perfect Standard Yiddish rhyme.  Volt dokh gedarft zayn
gut. But...  there was no Standard Yiddish as we know it today when
this song was first recorded (by Prilutski in 1911 or 1914 and in my
family - circa 1910 but probably within the twenty years before
that).  I recorded this song, as mentioned, from my grandmother, of
Suchowola, Poland (between Bialystok and Grodno) where the one StY
_oy_ is pronounced [ey] (the classic litvish-marker) and the other
-- [ou].  My grandmother's rendition:  sometimes (a) and sometimes
(b): a mol iz geven azey un azey

	(a) a man hot avekgevorfn a yunge froy
	(b) a man hot avekgevrofn a yunge frou

[OOPS.  A few lines up I meant to say that the other diphthong
correspond- ing to StY _oy_ is [oy] or [ou] -- there's variation
between the two.] (There's actually a lot more that could be said
about this:  was this song then composed in the small area where the
oy/ey or oy/ou merger took place to yield the situation we have in
so-called StY?  Or does this harken back to the hypothesis, I think
of Max Weinreich, that there was actually a form _frey_ 'froy'?

Another example is the counting-out rhyme (like English
eenie-meenie-miny-moe:([)

	eyne deyne dutke datke
	tsibele bebele broyne kladke
	eyne deyne doys
	vemen s'kumt aroys

{For the less proficient in Yiddish:  there are nonsense words in
here, so don't be surprised if you can't find half of it in the
disctionary.)

Now, I heard the rhyme at the end as a full rhyme, or often it was
broken, vi keyn mol gornisht, as such:

	eyne deyne dous
	vemen s'kumt aroys

or

eyne deyne doys
vemen...arous

If you listen to the Megile-lider of Itsik Manger, you'll hear
people breaking intended rhymes quite often (I'm talking about the
Burstyn family's rendition, I think the only recorded rendition).
Mike Burstyn sings:

	...a mol
	...ayzn un shtul (='shtol')

In this case, the rhyme could have been fully successful in his
dialect (unlike the froy-azoy example above, in which the rhyme is
unacceptable in any spoekn dialect [except for the small merger
area]).  Burstyn might have been wavering between "teater-loshn" and
"di literarishe shprakh" or whatever he spoke/speaks at home.

	I could bring more examples from my folksong collection
(with my grandmother as informant -- a blatant rhyme-breaker) but
none come to mind at the moment (especially bec of the hour).  This
definitely should be looked into.  Itsik Gottesman has told me that
his grandmother, a tape of whose singing he produced (Az di furst
avek) and of whom some 300 songs/ballads/etc. were collected, was
also a blatant rhyme-breaker. Ellen, what can you tell us about
Sarah Gorby?  She, on the other hand, was a professional performer
-- did she break rhymes too?

Bekitser, rhyme-breaking is a possibilty in folk tradition (and
perhaps profesional tradition as well) in Yiddish.  Of course this
could be a disturbance in chorus-singing, though. The rhyme-breaking
takes place, of course, when there's variation within one dialect
(or within the speaker's repertoire of dialects, e.g. Burstyn) or
when a rhyme created in one dialect (presumably) is picked up by
speakers of another.

4.  Khayim:  Shloyme Birnboym proposed a spelling system that would
reflect everybody's variation.  It's in his early works and in his
1979 _Yiddish:  A Survey and a Grammar_ he uses the "eynhaytlekher
oysleyg", aka YIVO system, alongside his system.  (It's act ually
very unreliable in that book because of the multitude of typos.) His
suggestion in the 1920s or 1930s was to differentiate between the
alef written with a komets underneath and an alef written with a dot
above it -- the one with the komets is Northeastern Yiddish [o],
Southern Yiddish [u]; the one with the dot is [o] in all dialects,
e.g. in kop.  His vov is everybody's [u], e.g. literatur, but
otherwise it's melupm-vov for So Southern Yiddish [i] and
Northeastern Yiddish [u].  He also uses khirik-yud for the long [i:]
as opposed to short [i], a distinction absent in North- eastern.

While the standard Yiddish orthography (and the non-standard
variants ) are an extra burden for the speaker of Southern Yiddish
(these people have to learn that [kimen] and [finf] are spelled with
different representations of the vowel [i], Birnbaum's system
creates the extra burden on the litvak, since s/he has to unmerge
his [i], know when his [o] corresponds to [o] and when to [u], etc.
etc. Lifshits also tried to introduce some superdialectal spelling
conventions in his dictionaries (Yiddish-Russian and Russian-Yiddish
in the 1880s, if if memory serves me corectly):  he had an umlaut
over the alef which was for him [u], as opposed to the alef which is
[o], e.g. kopirn.

5.  der mentsh trakht un got lakht -- I plan to leave the computer a
half hour ago and what happens?  Ikh tseshrayb zikh.  But one last
word: I'm moving to Boston in a week and would like to be in touch
with Yiddish-speakers, young and old, in that area. Please drop me a
line if you have any referrals!  Thanks!

Dovid Braun	braund@babel.ling.upenn.edu

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 3.091

