Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 1 no. 172
February 15, 1992
 
1) Sitter (Dovid Braun)
2) Gribn (Martin Davis)
3) Farshidens (Yude-Leyb Proger)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 14 Feb 92 13:56:12 EST
From: David Braun <braund@linc.cis.upenn.edu>
Subject: sitter

Refoel,

For me, zitsern/zitserke conjures up the image of
markzitsern/markzitserke 'woman who sells various
foodstuffs (beans, etc.) at a market; low-class woman'.
Incidentally, there's a transliteration/transcription
question connected to this.  The -i- before the -n is not
pronounced, although it is written in Standard Yiddish
spelling.  Some transliterate _zitserin_ and others -
_zitsern_ which is truer to the actual pronunciation.  This
is of course the situation with _zinger(i)n_ 'female
singer', _lerer(i)n_ 'female teacher' etc. etc. (If you say
_lererke_, _zitserke_ like me, then you have no trouble at
all!)  Yiddish as written in the USSR (olevasholekhts) got
rid of the orthographic yud in the feminine-marker -n.

--Dovid Braun

 
2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 14 Feb 92 14:56:39 -0500
From: davism@turing.cs.nyu.edu
Subject: RE:  Mendele Vol 1.171

As a boy I loved my mother's "gribn" (she definitely
pronounced it with a "b"). They were made in the frying pan
from chicken fat and had the consistency (as I found much
later) of small bits of fried bacon.

In later years my wife used a similar process with goose
fat with which she also pleased me greatly. The term she
knew for the process (coming from the US midwest) was
"rendering."

Martin Davis

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 12 Feb 92 20:14:57 IST
From: RHLE302@HAIFAUVM.BITNET
Subject: More salad

           FEET AND NUTS: KEEPING THE FACTS OF YIDDISH STRAIGHT
 
When errors are repeated often enough they become accepted
as fact. It is best to stop them in the bud.  We ought to
be especially concerned that information about Yiddish be
accurate. In _Parade_ of 22 March 1987, Nat Broudy says
that Yiddish _nisl_ means 'Nut' and Yiddish _fisl_ means
'feet' (neither word is transcribed there according to the
Standardized Yiddish Romanization). _Nisl_ means 'little
nut' (it is a diminutive form of _nus_ 'nut') and _fisl_
means 'little foot' (it is a diminutive form of _fus_
'foot'.
 
Since February 1988, Avshalom Kor has had a spot talking
about the Hebrew language on Israeli television.  It is
called "Higia Hazeman Lashon," which is a pun on Heb.
"higia hazeman lishon" 'It's time for bed'. On 3 March 1988
he mentioned "the Yiddish word _frekh_." There is no such
Yiddish word.  He meant the German word _frech_.
 
Also on 3 March 1988, the Hebrew radio reported on the
approximately half million documents about Jewish
settlement in the Land of Israel which are now housed in a
museum in Kefar Tavor. The director of the museum, David
Goldman, said that certain of the documents were in (Heb.)
"zhargon" {'jargon'}. One rarely hears this pejorative
Hebrew name for Yiddish today, and it is all the more
unexpected from the lips of someone whose Hebrew is
decidedly influenced by Yiddish.
 
On 3 March 1988, an Israeli Jewish college teacher,
Ashkenazic, interviewed on Hebrew television, complained
that Israeli soldiers were taking the "Christian attitude
of 'if someone spits on you, say it's raining' and 'if
someone slaps you on one cheek, let him slap you on the
other'." The second attitude is indeed Christian (see the
New Testament), but the first is based solely on the
Yiddish saying _az me shpayt der hur in ponim zogt zi, az
se regnt_ 'if you spit a whore in the face, she say's its
raining'. The Yiddish saying has been taken into Hebrew in
a generalized form: _yorekim alecha bapanim, veata omer
sheze geshem_ 'They're spitting you in the face and you say
it's rain'.

                             ******
 
IS IT TRUE THAT THERE ARE YIDDISH-SPEAKING ORTHODOX JEWS WHO AVOID USING
     WORDS OF HEBREW-ARAMAIC ORIGIN IN CERTAIN PLACES OR SITUATIONS?
 
Very Orthodox Jews in Ashkenaz 2 (and 3?) tried to avoid
words of Hebrew-Aramaic origin while in the bathhouse, a
place of lower order (compared to home or synagog or
mikve), as evidenced in the fact that it had no mezuza on
its door.  Devoted as it was to physical hygiene, to
washing the _body_, it might aid in achieving holiness but
was not in itself a sanctified or sanctifiable place.  Thus
an Orthodox Jew would avoid speaking the word _Shabos_ or
{Yiddish} _shabes_ 'Sabbath' on Friday afternoons when in
the _bod_ 'bathhouse', but referred instead to _der
zibeter_ 'the seventh (day)' (a case of style-switching).

Conceivably, this very same Jew might have been one of
those very few Orthodox Jews who tried to speak
Loshn-koydesh on the Sabbath, thereby sanctifying that day
further and not desecrating it by using the profane
vernacular (a case of code-switching).  Not much is known
about this remarkable practice of certain diglossal Jews in
the not too distant past to shift their speech from one
style or code to another, depending on time and place.  All
of us switch registers when we find ourselves in certain
situations, but these are not ideologically motivated,
intentional behaviors, but conventional learned responses
(e.g. as when we switch from informal to formal speech in
certain ceremonious settings).

How much is known about ultra-Orthodox Loshn-koydesh
avoidance in the bathhouse and vernacular-avoidance on the
Sabbath respectively?
 
                            *******
 
      DO JEWISH THEATERS GENERALLY HAVE MEZUZOT ON THEIR DOORS?
 
Presumably, in Israel at least, public places of
entertainment, including theaters (unless specifically
proscribed), have mezuzot on their doors. A stormy
discussion arose at the end of 1987 around the statement of
the Haifa Chief Sephardic rabbi that the mezuza be removed
from the Haifa Municipal Theater building because of the
lewd plays performed there, plays often featuring
nakedness, obscenity, illicit relations, etc.

Modern European theater, of which Israeli theater is a
descendant, traces its ancestry from fifth century BCE
Greek ritual and medieval European Christian Easter tropes;
its religious origins and affinities are well acknowledged.
On the other hand there is a long tradition of rabbinic
opposition to theater among the Jews, which parallels
similar Church opposition to public plays. Interestingly,
the Yiddish theater, which is perhaps the major immediate
source of the Israeli theatre, saw its first "regualar"
play produced in a yeshiva by yeshive-bokher actors:
_Serkele_ by Shloyme Etinger (1803-1856) in the Zhitomir
Yeshiva, with Avrom Goldfadn, founder of the modern Yiddish
theatre, in the lead female role.

In the West, there has always been tension, as well as
reciprocity, between theater and religion.  In Israel
moderate Orthodox Jews attend the theatre (one can identify
them by their head covering), and extreme rightist
secularists often oppose the theatre when it engages in
bold social and political criticism.  The demarcation line
between supporters and opponents of the theatre is not
drawn on strictly religious lines.  Nothing has actually
happened to the mezuza at the Haifa Municipal Theater; it's
removal was merely broached -- that was enough to set off a
public debate.
 
                                ******
                     THE ASHKENAZIC BACKLASH
 
 
On the eve of the Israeli elections in 1981, Dudu Topaz, a
popular entertainer, made an ethnic slur on television
which proved disastrous to the Coalition (Mapay and Mapam):
he referred to Israeli Jews of Asian and African origin as
_tshachtshachim_, a Hebrew ethnophaulism which until then
had not seemed so sinister. The largely Ashkenazic Labour
Party apparently suffered from Topaz's indiscrete
utterance, but some Ashkenazim, at least in their hearts,
took some cheer from it. Topaz's faux pas was a harbinger
of what in retrospect we may call "the Ashkenazic
backlash," a barely articulated sense that there had been
continuous and persistent emphasis on the culture of
non-Ashkenazic Jews and relatively little attention (some
would say "virtual silence") about the thousand-year-old
heritage of Ashkenaz and, in particular, of Yiddish, its
chief vernacular and (together with Hebrew) its major
carrier.
 
Yude-Leyb Proger
 
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol 1.172

