Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 1 no. 171
February 14, 1992
 
1) Farshidens (Yude-Leyb Proger)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 12 Feb 92 17:44:36 IST
From: RHLE302@HAIFAUVM.BITNET
Subject: A small salad

              ARE _GRIVEN_ 'CRACKLINGS'?
 
Alexander Harkavy glosses _grivn_ (which is an alternative
form for _gribenes_) accurately but broadly as 'scraps',
whereas Uriel Weinreich (=_MEYYED_) defines this common
food item more narrowly as 'cracklings; well-browned bits
of goose skin'.  Is there a problem regarding the first
part of this gloss? Cracklings are often understood to be
'the crisp part remaining after the lard has been removed
from hog fat by frying' (_Webster's New World Dictionary of
the American Language_, 1956).  On the other hand, they are
often synonymous with _greaves_, defined by the _Webster's
New World Dictionary of the American Language_ (1956) as
'the sediment of skin, etc. formed when animal fat is
melted down for tallow; cracklings'.

Nokhem Stutshkov {Nahum Stutschkoff}, in his _Thesaurus of
the Yiddish Language_ cites (and marks as sub-standard)
_skvarkes_ and _shkvarkes_ (from Polish _skwarki_
'cracklings, greaves'). Given the widespread consumption of
pork in Poland, it is almost certain that the reference is
to pork cracklings -- are there also poultry, etc.
cracklings? Polish Jews knew the term for pork cracklings,
since they may have produced them as a by-product of tallow
manufacture or other industrial processes.

Was _skvarkes_ marked as substandard because it is a
redundant borrowing for _grivn_, because it is a
lower-class slavicism or because of its associative
reference to pork? Is _shkvarkes_ a Northeastern Yiddish
hypercorrectism or a comic distortion?   One way to protect
oneself from eating forbidden delicacies is to give them a
bad name.
 
This matter leads one to the larger subject of how Jewish
languages {= JLs} name Jewishly-forbidden or proscribed
non-Jewish (not just Christian, religious) concepts and
realia. This leads to a dual vocabulary (e.g. shtarbn vs.
peygern, bes-oylem vs. tsinter, yontef vs. khoge).  This is
in addition to a separate pejorative register for much of
the non-Jewish world (e.g. _Shvarts-tume_ 'pollution') for
use among Jews, alongside a neutral register (e.g.
_Byela-tserkov_ {Bila-Tserkva}) when a Gentile is present
or on a formal occasion.  In certain instances the neutral
referent and the pejorative are the same word, e.g.
_khazir_ 'pig').

                            *****
 
 
                YIDISHKEYT WITHOUT YIDDISH?
 
A. J. Sherman, in the _Times Literary Supplement_ of 14
September 1984 (p. 1032), reviewing Roberta Strauss
Feuerlicht, _The Fate of the Jews: A People Torn Between
Israeli Power and Jewish Ethics_ (London: Quartet, 1984),
remarked that "Feuerlicht's argument is unfortunately
weakened by her impressionistic rendering of Jewish
history; occasional garbled phrases in Yiddish do not
inspire confidence as to her grasp of the tradition she
purports to defend."  Here we see a reviewer's language
sensitivity put to analytic use.  Anti-Zionist writers
sometimes make invidious comparisons between Yiddish and
Hebrew or between Diaspora Ashkenazic culture and Israeli
culture. The least one can expect from a defender of
"Yidishkeyt" is some knowledge of Yiddish.

                              ****

      MORE JEWISH DEFENSE THAN THE JEWISH DEFENSE LEAGUE
 
Words of Jewish-language origin are constantly knocking at
the doors of general English, but not all of them enter. It
is sometimes possible, as in the instance before us, to
follow the fortunes of a neologism which may not enter but
will remain a fascinating curiosity at the least.  Not too
long ago I read an article headed "Scientific Sleuth, and a
Frog, Solve a Medical Mystery" (_International Herald
Tribune_, London, 31 July 1987, pp. 1, 6), which told of
Dr. Michael Zasloff (whose Slavic name suggests Eastern
Ashkenazic origin if he is Jewish) who "... found it: a
previously unknown family of powerful natural antibiotics,
dubbed "magainins" from the Hebrew word for 'shield', whose
discovery holds the hope of both new treatments for many
human infections and a deeper understanding of animals'
defenses against disease" (p. 1).

The immediate etymon of English _magainin_ (pl.
_magainins_) is Hebrew _magen_ (pl. _maginim_).  It is
almost as though the Hebrew noun _magen_ 'shield' has
become a verb _to magen_, with _magaining_ representing
colloqial *magening. This pseudo-gerund then is pluralized
by adding -_s_.  The _ai_ can be explained as an attempt to
express modern Israeli Hebrew /ey/, the morpheme _gain_
being a kind of internal pun (more gain = ma gain).

An Ashkenazic Jew might very well have heard the "Jewish
star" referred to by its Yiddish name _mogn-dovid_ 'star of
David'.  But here we have the Israeli Hebrew form of the
word for 'shield'.  This could be evidence of the spread of
Hebrew among educated Jews in the Diaspora, a small
minority of whom are fluent in Hebrew (as is evident from
radio and television interviews in Israel, as well as from
meetings and conventions.) These people constitute an
intellectual elite and one would expect to find scientists
among them. Medicine is a profession which has always
attracted Jews and for centuries Jewish physicians have
written in Hebrew and have identified diseases with Hebrew
(often biblical) names.

                            ****
 
                       GILDING THE LILY
 
Among nineteenth-century central-European Jews certain name
endings, especially -_feld_, and -_heim_ were especially
popular and were added for purely ornamental purposes.
This can be seen with particular clarity where these
endings ornament a name which one would have thought
required no embellishment, namely _Cohen_ (in its various
spellings).  Thus we find _Cohnheim_ (cf. _Julius Cohnheim_
in _Encyclopaedia Judaica_ {= EJ} 5:693 and _Cohnfeld_ (cf.
the German-Jewish writer _A. Cohnfeld_, whose pseudonym was
August Buddelmeyer).

                            *****
 
                          SUPERSUBTLE?
 
In the _Rheinischer Merkur / Christ un Welt_ No. 45 (6
November 1987), p. 12, we read this about Douglas H.
Ginsburg: "In der Diskussion ueber Ginsbergs Nominierung
wurde von Kritikern seine mangelnde richterliche Praxis
bemaengelt.  Auch spielt seine juedische Herkunft eine
Rolle."  I believe that Ginsberg's use of marihuana in his
twenties rather than his being Jewish finished him as a
candidate, but assuming that the reporter has his facts
right, let us look at the last sentence of his report. He
might also have written: "Auch spielt es eine Rolle dass er
ein Jude ist"  or "dass er juedisch ist," or even "dass er
juedisher Herkunft ist."  The reporter chose a less direct
wording, one which splits off Ginsberg's background or
origins from Ginsberg himself.  The syntax of the
reporter's sentence is not objectionable, but one wonders
whether it reflects a certain reluctance to speak of its
subject as being a Jew or as being Jewish.

                            ******

Yude-Leyb Proger (Leonard Prager)
 
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol 1.170
