
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 2 no. 09
June 4, 1992
 
1) Bronfen (Sheldon Benjamin)
2) Kibitsn (Yitzhak Kertesz)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 04 Jun 92 00:12:55 EDT
From: sbenj@Athena.MIT.EDU
Subject: Bronfen

I had always assumed bronfen meant brandy, but I know it
was used for whiskey in our family.  Which brings up the
uses of the terms bronfen, mashke, shpirt (any others?).
Can anyone explain the finer points of when to use bronfen
and when mashke (apart from oyf simches!)?

This reminds me of the story of my great uncle Neach.
Neach's grandfather used to keep a barrel of bronfen
hidden under some hay in the barn as refreshment for the
man hired to help with the farm (apparently it was
concealed homemade shine).  When, at 4 years old he nearly
drowned in the Dnieper due to his habit of ignoring his
mother's pleas not to play near the water's edge, my great
grandmother dragged him off to the rebbe in Ostipole to ask
what to do with the boy. The answer (vu den?) was to enroll
him in cheder early.  There he'd be safe.  So, Uncle
Neach's grandfather, my great great grandfather Bentzi,
would take little Neach to cheder, then sit in the back of
the room and watch his miraculous grandson learn.  They
were doing alef-beys drills one day..........(you know
what's coming)...  "Hershel, vos iz unter dos alef?"
"Kometz alef o."  and   "Neach vos is unter dos hay?"  "I
can't tell you!" said the boy.  The rebbe gave him a patch
and asked again... "A kayfele bronfen!" he finally blurted
out.

Great uncle Neach has been dead for nearly 50 years but the
family still won't let him live that moment down....

Sheldon Benjamin

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu,  4 Jun 92 08:27:46 PDT
From: Yitzhak Kertesz <BM.LBH%RLG@Forsythe.Stanford.EDU>
Subject: Vanellus, or the peewit Herman

RWerman has an interesting keyboard, that produces strange
characters from time to time. The word "to collect, gather"
is spelled kuf-bet-tsadik, which is well known from the
"kabtsen", who is always ready to collect his rightful
share (tsedoke). Purists, please don't attack me, it is not
my fault that the dagesh didn't drop from the "bet".

I don't know the original meaning, but the kibits had an
important role in the world of the Central European
coffee-houses, casinos (sort of clubs, not Las Vegas style
hotels), especially around the card-players. Kibits was not
simply a passive onlooker, sort of fan, spectator. He was
very much part of the hevre (kibuts), although not
financially involved, like the players. The kibits was
always ready to give advise, and since he was more
interested in excitment, he often talked the player into a
risky game, that lead to great losses and major disputes.
Hence the saying: for a kibits nothing is too risky.

The kibits had very useful tasks. According to a Hungarian
saying, he had three important qualities: doesn't talk too
much, doesn't have smelly feet, and always has cigarettes
to spare. His real usefulness showed from the strategically
important positioning of his seat. He was expected to be
able to get a peak into the cards of the player to the left
or right (mostly to the left, since the game went
clockwise) of the player, for whom he was kibitsing. It is
easier to give advise from two hands. Even more interesting
situations arose, when a kibits was positioned behind an
opponent, and tried to give invisible signs to his pal.
Such signals led to major misunderstandings, and when
caught, to quite a few scandals.

One such story recorded by Biblical scholars of the devil:
The kibits suddenly pointed to his chest. His player played
coeur (heart), and lost big. In the ensuing dispute the
kibits defended himself: "Since when is my name Herz, my
name is Pick, don't you remember?" (Pick is the spades, if
I am not mistaken)

As for the bird Vanellus vanellus, in German Kiebitz, in
Northern Germany Kiewitt (dialectologists take note!),
according to the encyclopedias and dictionaries, it is the
same as the English lapwing or peewit. If I can believe my
dictionary, in Hebrew "kivit" (Kuf-yod-vav-yod-tav), and
for Elisheva, Eliot, and everybody else who cares to know,
in Hungarian "bibic". Symbol of the human soul in the
old-Egyptian religion.

Yitzhak Kertesz

[May the shames kibitz a little?  Lapwing is from the AS
hleapwince, from AS hleapen "run" and wincian "wink" (for
the bird's twisted flight).  Never mind.  A foygl vos loyft
un vinkt un makht in gantsn a tararam is take a kibitser.]

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol 2.09

If your message is intended for MENDELE, please write to:

                 mendele@vax1.trincoll.edu

If you want to discuss personal business or have a shmues with
the shames, please write to:

                 nmiller@vax1.trincoll.edu

Please sign your articles.


