
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 7.032
June 30, 1997

1) Weinreich's phrase book (Ron Robboy)
2) Frayland, A mythic country (Arre Komar)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 30 Jun 1997 11:56:24 -0700
From: rrobboy@cts.com (Ron Robboy)
Subject: Weinreich's phrase book

It was good to read Michael Chabon eloquent and sincere remarks about his now 
notorious article [7.029].  I haven't found a copy of the original article 
yet, but I want to comment on his words appearing in his Mendele post.

He makes a big point of the fact that, as a "book which explicitly advertises 
itself, on the cover, in capital letters, as a PHRASEBOOK FOR TRAVELLERS, 
[it] naturally, logically, and commercially implies the existence of a 
country to be travelled to.  A country.  An entire nation. Not a 
neighborhood...Not the annual meeting of a Yiddish language society..."

My own copy, as it happens, mentions travel, but does not have the banner
PHRASEBOOK FOR TRAVELLERS advertisement.  What it says on the inside of the
front cover, on the other hand, is worth quoting in its entirety:

"Written by Dr. Uriel Weinreich (Professor of Yiddish at Columbia University) 
and Mrs. Beatrice Weinreich, this is a serious work based upon the best 
modern colloquial and literary usage.  It avoids stage or 'Yankee' Yiddish, 
and confines itself to the Yiddish which is a living primary or secondary 
language for several million people.  Besides being a contribution to 
linguistics and an important work in Jewish culture, this is, to the 
publisher's knowledge, the first extensive serious phrase book ever compiled 
for Yiddish.  It is part of Dover's program of providing phrase books for 
languages of special cultural interest."

So Mr. Chabon's leap of logic that a phrasebook "commercially" implies a
whole country, "an entire nation," is all but explicitly repudiated by the
publisher.  Languages of "special cultural interest" are, in light of any
useful meaning of that phrase, ones that are not necessarily THE language
an entire nation.

Mr. Chabon goes on to say, "No one takes a Chinese phrasebook for travellers 
to Chinatown..."

Why on earth not, Mr. Chabon?  If by "Chinatown" you mean a block or two of
storefronts selling tourist gewgaws -- a kind of municipally-zoned ethnic
theme park -- then perhaps not.  But if you mean in the real world of 1997
-- "_Now._ Post 1958," in your words -- then it seems like an altogether
useful idea to me.  Doing business in my neighborhood -- there is a Somali
mosque where my cross street meets the boulevard -- it could be valuable to
carry phrasebooks not just in the ubiquitous Spanish and Cantonese, but
also Vietnamese, Thai, Cambodian, Lao, Hmong, Russian, Amharic, Arabic --
and Yiddish.  (I'm walking distance from a Chabad center as well.)

This is, I think, the nub of the matter.  Mr. Chabon is quite clear that
his central assumption is that it involves a patent absurdity to publish a
phrasebook for a language with no nation.  This is the "inherent
implication...the central pillar of my ruminative essay."  As much as I
agree with him -- both artistically and emotionally -- of the poignancy and
even Kafkaesque dissonance suggested by the phrases for dealing with
customs agents and other government officials, I question his basic
assumption, his "central pillar."  I question it not on an ad hoc basis for
purposes of argument here, but on the basis of my deep and abiding
ideological commitment to the right of any language's right to existence
regardless of the particularities of current political and territorial
dominance.  "A language is a dialect with an army and a navy," as Max
Weinreich's famous formula has it, quoted more than once on Mendele in the
recent past (Shikl Fishman [6.077] and Ellen Prince [6.167]).  The
discussion at hand -- climaxed by Mr. Chabon's stated assumption -- goes
straight to the heart of the meaning of diaspora in the human condition.
This may have been the larger point addressed by the Weinreichs:  not
(merely) that it is sad to offer phrases that will never be used, but that
they have as much a right to do so as all other peoples.  (The other
explicitly Yiddishist agenda I suspect the Weinreichs and their
sympathizers would have embraced is the demonstration that Yiddish is
capable of sustaining discourse in all these nation-like fields of
endeavor.)  Mr. Chabon has implicitly questioned this right to discourse
with his statement about the logic of entire nations.

"There is no nation to take the Weinreichs' little phrasebook to; for every
other language in the series, such a country exists," he writes.  In fact,
even that assertion is untrue.  My copy lists Esperanto on the back cover
along with Yiddish and the various politically enfranchised languages.  As
I was growing up, my own understanding of the primary usefulness of Yiddish
was that, like Esperanto, it could serve as an invaluable lingua franca
nearly anywhere in the world -- a kind of visa in and of itself -- albeit
for a limited constituency.  Wherever one went, there were always going to
be Yiddish speakers.  Even if there were only one or two such speakers --
perhaps especially if there were only one or two -- invoking a Yiddish
phrase was a guaranteed assurance of, not just certain recognition and
probable friendliness, but quite possibly of refuge.  Mr. Chabon poses the
question:   Where, in 1997, could you go that it would behoove you to know
how to say, in Yiddish, "Which way to the casino?"  I can't speak to
current conditions at Native American gaming establishments in, say,
Connecticut, but out here in the Western U.S., if your car broke down in
the Mojave Desert and you had two dollars in your wallet, if you hitchhiked
into Las Vegas I'll bet you double or nothing Mr. Chabon's question would
buy you dinner and use of a phone if you chose your interlocutor astutely.

Looking through the phrasebook, I came upon the section on applying for a
job.  Adopting Mr. Chabon's skepticism, I thought, "Who would ever use
this?"  Almost immediately, I was struck by the arrogance of my viewpoint.
How many hundreds, even thousands, of laborers must be employed by
Yiddish-speaking Hasidim in the New York area in service industries, retail
and domestic work, or any number of other sectors of an often-underground
Hasidic economy (such as the cash-only construction trades)?  One has only
to think of the accounts (perhaps apocryphal) that General Colin Powell,
working for Jewish employers in some fairly menial capacity, learned basic
Yiddish skills as a youth .  How many such workers -- and one thinks
especially of shabes goyim -- might benefit immensely, might draw
tremendous advantage, from learning those basic Yiddish skills that would
allow them to significantly alter the emotional and psychological footing
on which they must interact with their Yiddish-speaking employers?

Lastly (I promise), I note that the publisher claimed "Say It in Yiddish"
is the first such phrasebook ever published.  I confess to a certain pride
in recalling for Mendelistn my post [6.203] commenting on the distinguished
musician and lexicographer Nicholas Slonimsky's claim that his uncle Josef
Slonimsky, of Warsaw, had written a Norwegian-Yiddish travelers'
phrasebook, presumably around the last turn of the century.

Ron Robboy
San Diego, California

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 30 Jun 1997 22:21:18 -0400 (EDT)
From: Arthur Komar <komar@suhep.phy.syr.edu>
Subject: Frayland, A mythic country

I have owned the the Weinreich little traveler's guide for decades and
loved it. However I never sensed the bittersweet dimension of it until the
very moving note you just published by the author of the Smithsonian
article. I found that he articulated a subconscious message that had been
ruminating in my soul for years and I am very grateful for him to have
done so. Far from denigrating Yiddish, he mourned a land that never came
into being. 

Most people don't seem to recall one sad piece of Holocaust history. In
1945 as the survivors were being liberated, an organization was founded
called The Frayland League whose goal was to establish a Yiddish speaking
state, to be called Frayland. They negotiated with the Dutch government to
obtain Surinam as a haven for the Yiddish speaking survivors who were
being brutally detained by the British in new camps, to prevent them from
entering Palestine.

The Zionist, who were exceedingly hostile to Yiddish, were desparate to
prevent the Dutch government from ceding the land, since they felt that
the pressure would then have abated for the establishment of a Hebrew
speaking state in Israel. Informal poles taken in the camps seem to
indicate that the majority of the newly liberated preferred having a
Yiddish state, since Yiddish was their native language. 

On the eve of the Dutch vote, in 1946, Golda Mayerson, among others,
rushed to Holland to politic forcefully against Frayland, using her Second
International connections in the Dutch Social Democratic Party. When the
vote was finally taken Frayland lost by one vote. The Hebrew state that
ultimately resulted, maintained a vendetta against Yiddish for these many
generations.

Yes, there almost was a Yiddish nation where the little traveler's guide
would have been a useful and valuable accessory.  But a miss is as good as
a mile. And as long as Israel no longer feels threatened by Yiddish and
lets it live its precarious existance we gladly transfer our affections to
it. To quote an old Yiddish song "Ver mir zaynen zaynen mir, Ober Yidn
zaynen mir." 

Arre Komar

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 7.032

Mendele has 2 rules:

        1. Provide a meaningful Subject: line
        2. Sign your article (full name please)

Send articles to:
    mendele@lists.yale.edu

Send change-of-status messages to:
    listproc@lists.yale.edu

        a. For a temporary stop: set mendele mail postpone
        b. To resume delivery: set mendele mail ack
        c. To subscribe: sub mendele first_name last_name
        d. To unsubscribe kholile: unsub mendele

Other business:
    victor.bers@yale.edu                     Victor Bers
    iiv@mmlds1.pha.unc.edu                   Iosif Vaisman
    nmiller@mail.trincoll.edu                Noyekh Miller

              ****Getting back issues****

1. Anonymous ftp archives are available.

ftp ftp.mendele.trincoll.edu
    in the directory pub/mendele/files
    A table of contents is also available, along with weekly updates.

2. Mendele archives can also be reached as follows:

via WWW:
    http://sunsite.unc.edu/yiddish/mewais.html

via ftp:
    ftp://sunsite.unc.edu/pub/academic/languages/yiddish/mendele
