
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 3.184
December 24, 1993

1) Re: my diatribes (Roslyn Kalifowicz-Waletzky)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu Dec 23 12:06:07 1993
From: Roslyn Kalifowicz-Waletzky <0005943838@mcimail.com>
Subject: Re: my diatribes

>Reyzl Kalifowicz-Waletzky's diatribes about Yiddish can be amusing.
>However, it is dangerous to state opinions as facts without anyone
>being able to check the statements. Many Mendele subscribers are
>Yiddish enthusiasts who may take any thing stated with force as
>"Toyres Moyshe" or - lehavdl - Gospel truth.

Anything I have written here about daytshmerizmen can be found in
discussions written by a long list of Yiddish linguists since the
beginning of the 20th century.  Their presentations are better than
anything I can produce in a posting.  I don't know who your "Toyres
Moshe" is,  but I trust in the authority of great scholars in the
field such as Max Weinreich, Uriel Weinreich, Shloyme Birnboym,
Kalmanovitch, Shtif, Prilutsky, Zalmen Reyzn, Giniger, et al (I am
not even going to list Yiddish writers).  If you know of better
ones, then present them and I will listen.

>I would like to know how Kalifowicz-Waletzky can justify the use of
>the term "daytshmerizmen" when discussing Old Yiddish

How in the world you got the impression that I am speaking of Old
Yiddish anywhere, eyn got veyst.  I suggest you re-read Vol.3.158.

>I would like to know ... why she {Kalifowicz-Waletzky} thinks "leyenen"
>is older than "lezn". I would never dare to make that statement, and I
>have spent many an hour reading pre-modern Yiddish texts. Although I
>haven't paid particular attention to the first appearance of these forms,
>my hunch is that both preexist written evidence.

        If you don't know on what basis I make some of my
statements, it's wiser to ask for the proof instead of claiming that
someone is making a diatribe just because they speak of the evidence
with some passion.

        I haven't forgotten that in your original posting to which I
responded, you spoke of "lesn" as it appeared in 16th and 17th
century texts from Western Yiddish.  What has that to do with
Eastern Yiddish, which is clearly what I am talking about?

        I'm told that your specialty is pre-modern Yiddish texts.
Surely then, you are aware that the traditions of Yiddish writing
are different from Yiddish speech.  (Neil Jacobs before your posting
and Dovid Miller after also pointed this out here.)  I am sure you
know, though I don't know why you fail to mention it, that Yiddish
writing of the pre-modern period borrowed much terminology and style
from New High German and thus tended to use "lezn" rather than the
old romance-root term "leyenen".  Pre-modern Eastern Yiddish writing
copied Western Yiddish style, but of course I have been speaking
here of neither.   I am speaking only of 20th century Eastern
Yiddish SPEECH.  I may make a mistake, but my area is not pre-modern
Yiddish texts and I don't write about what I don't know.

>Am I right when I suppose Kalifowicz-Waletzky thinks that "leyenen"
>must be older because of Weinreich's hypothesis that the first
>Yiddish speakers were originally speakers of a romance language? If
>so, this seems to me to be an example of circularity.

        O.K.  You asked for the evidence and I will give it to you.
The evidence abounds.  I found this by a quick look into Max
Weinreich's works.

This is one citation from Weinreich's "Geshikhte fun der yidishe
shprakh", vol. 2, p.61-62.

"In LEYENEN hobn mir a vort vos iz nit keyn sored {=remnant} in teyl
dialektn, nor s'iz lebedik un farshpreyt bekhol tfutses yidish.
S'iz keyn sofik nit, az s'iz gekumen fun determinant laazish, der
avi-aves iz der lataynisher verb LEGER `leyenen'.  Az der ov ken nit
zayn keyn dorem-laazisher derkenen mir fun dem vos der italyenisher
nusakh is mit [dzh] -- oysgeleygt LEGGERE -- haynt un in ale
friyerdike stadyes fun italyenish.  Dos hayntike frantseyzishe LIRE
zet oykh nit oys keyn sakh neenter.  Ober far an oysgangpunkt darfn
mir nemen di eltere yidishe forme 0LEYEN (oysgeleygt lamed, tsvey
yudn, aleph, nun; der tsukum fun tsveytn -EN {-ayin nun}, alehey in
GANVEN+EN, bavayst zikh in di tekstn nit friyer vi in zekhtsetn
yorhundert), un oykh in frantseyzish muzn mir tsurikgeyn gor gor
vayt...Mit andere verter, dos yidishe vort iz elter eyder
frantseyzish, s'shpiglt op a prefrantseyzishe (galoromanishe) tkufe
fun mayrev-laazish."

Vol. 4, p. 88:

"LEYENEN azoy iz shoyn bay undz ongenumen fun lang, iz gebundn mit
lataynish LEGERE; un memeyle hot es in yidish arayn gekont kumen nor
durkh laazish.  Ober mir kenen pretsezirn: ven s'zol geven zayn fun
dorem-laazish, volt men zikh gerikht oyf [-dzh-] anshtot dem
lataynishn intervokalishn -G-;

ot hobn mir dokh, in an enlekher situatsye, [-tsh-] in BENTSHN,
farglaykht lataynish BENENDICERE.  Heyst es LEYENEN iz tsu undz
gekumen durkh mayrev- laazim: der bazis fun dem romanishn komponent
in zeyer shprakh is gevaksn in Galye, un dortn iz der -G-
prevokalizirt gevorn un nokh dem gefaln in gantsn; farglaykh LEGER
keneged frantseyzish LIRE.  In tsvelftn yorhundert iz shoyn LIRE
geven durkhgefirt durkhoys; undzer LEYE- LEGE muz deriber shtamen
fun gor a friyikn alt-frantseyzish, efsher gor fun an erev
frantseyzishn shikht."

        Weinreich also has many more comments on leyenen and its
appearance in Yiddish texts.  I will reproduce here only part of his
comments about lezn, some of which are fascinating and probably
something none of us knew about, including me:  "S'volt geven falsh
tsu zogn, az in der elterer yidisher literatur iz lezn lakhlutn
nito, ober s'iz lekhol-adeyes zeltn biz gor.  Ikh hob es bamerkt in
"sam khayim", Prog, 1590; ober dukht zikh nor in gram....Der ershter
taytsh fun Alt-hoykh-daytsh LE"SAN, farglaykh KLUGE, 355, iz a
paganisher; dos vort hot gemeynt: `oyfklaybn un tseleygn shteklekh,
vos oyf zey zaynen geven oysgekritst runes'.  Dernokh iz gevorn der
batayt: `lernen yenem', `leyenen far yenem', `leyenen di mese'.
Grimm, Deutsches Worterbuch 6, 778: nokh vayter vi in der
mitl-hoykh-daytsh tsayt vert LESEN genitst tsu batseykhenen dos
ofitsyele retsitirn di kristelekhe lernung.  BWb, 1, 1512,
farnotirt, az in groyse teyln Bayern hot LESEN "nokh haynt" dem
pshat `mispalel zayn'.  In a tsayt ven dos vort hot gehat aza ofenem
k r i s t l e k h n  batayt hot es far yidn nit getoygt."

He has written (as have others) much more about all this than cited
here. It's always enriching when you check Max out.

Reyzl

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 3.184

Mendele has 2 rules:

	1. Provide a Subject: line.
	2. Sign your article.

Send submissions/responses to:

        mendele@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

Other business:

        nmiller@starbase.trincoll.edu

Anonymous ftp archives available on:

        ftp.mendele.trincoll.edu
        in the directory pub/mendele/files




