Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 1 no. 154
January 30, 1992
 
1) Ludic Yiddish, part 2 (Yude-Leyb Proger)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 30 Jan 92 13:34:45 IST
From: leonard prager <RHLE302@HAIFAUVM.BITNET>
Subject: ludic yiddish

My thesis in "Ludic Yiddish (Note One)" was that as Yiddish
as an everyday language declines among non-ultra-Orthodox
Ashkenazim, its LUDIC uses are stressed at the expense of
others. I also point out that a counter-movement to this
trend exists and has been gaining strength as the second
and third generation of Eastern European-origin Jews gives
way to the fourth.  It is surely significant that our
beloved Noyekh Shames writes in one of the numbers of his
and our favorite electronic periodical that he cherishes
"the playfulness and self-irony in Yiddish" and that "that
is what makes Yiddish Yiddish" (the quotation may not be
exact).  There is nothing wrong in indicating one's likes,
but defining anything for everybody seems invalid. There is
surely something inherently wrong with the essentialist
implication that Yiddish must possess a certain set of
properties and no others in order to be Yiddish, that
characteristics a and b are quintessential whereas c to z
are accidental, incidental, inessential. Noyekh's statement
tells us a lot about our generation, but it is hardly
adequate as a description of Yiddish.  The vast majority of
Yiddish-speakers in the past millenium would not have
pointed to playfulness and self-mockery or self-derision as
the salient qualities of their mother tongue.
 
Moroever, there is no language in the world -- nor could
there be -- without playfulness, however defined, and there
may not be any languages around without self-irony as well.
For unadulterated playfulness we can read James Joyce's
_Finnegan's Wake_, which combines the comic spirit and high
seriousness (including irony) with incredibly imaginative
multilingual word-games.  Shakespeare, too, is no slouch
for verbal playfulness (often with an acid sting):  "A
little more than kin and less than kind." No, play is the
basis of all language and all peoples play with sounds and
groups of sounds in songs, ballads, curses, dirges and
orations.  Playfulness of various kinds -- it would take a
monograph to define them -- is one of many registers all
languages possess in one way or another to this or that
degree and Yiddish is no exception.  It is not playfulness
per se that makes Yiddish Yiddish.  Nor could it be irony,
self-irony or any kind of irony that makes Yiddish Yiddish,
since much of Yiddish thought, speech, expression,
proverbs, phraseology is pathetic, pietistic, solemn, wise,
sober, cautionary, exuberant, mawkish, sentimental, vulgar,
insipid, romantic -- almost anything but ironic.
 
Yiddish to most Yiddish speakers is Yiddish because it is
theirs and was their parents'.  (The same holds for strong
haters of Yiddish). It is an extremely personal possession.
Once you love someone, it is not hard to ask "How do I love
you?  Let me count the ways...."  Here are the first three
stanzas of Moris Roznfeld's {Morris Rosenfeld's} "Yidish":
"Ir fregt, oyb yidish iz a shprakh, / Gramatish un negidish
-- / Ikh ken aykh zogn nor eyn zakh: / Dem yidns shprakh iz
yidish.        Tsu zukhn -- ligt nisht in mayn fakh -- /
Fun vanen verter shtamen. / Ikh veys nor, az ikh lib mayn
shprakh, / Dem loshn fun mayn mamen.       Ot vi zi hot
geredt tsu mir, / Azoy reyd ikh atsinder, / Far mir iz
yidish groys on shier / Un vunder iber vunder {pronounced
/vinder/}.
 
To get some notion of what Yiddish-speakers value in
Yiddish, take a look at what itself is an incredible
phenomenon, one which exists for few other languages: an
anthology of poems all of which have as their central theme
the Yiddish language.  Hungarian poets have written poems
celebrating the vowels of the Magyar tongue, which is said
to be vocalically very rich.  French and Turkish poets have
done the same with their languages.

But, especially because of the tragic dimension in Jewish
history, particularly in the past century, there may be no
precise parallel to the position Yiddish has held and holds
in the hearts of its writers and readers and, to an extent
difficult to measure, its speakers.

Browse through _Yidish in lid; Antologye; 169 lider fun 74
poetn_, ed. Shmuel Rozhanski (Buenos-Aires: Literatur
gezelshaft bam Yivo in argentine, 1967 {= Musterverk fun
der yidisher literatur 33}), which by no means has garnered
more than a fraction of this genre.  Froyim Oyerbakh's
"Yidish" summarily demolishes the notion that Yiddish is
any one thing: "Far mir bistu a regnboygn fun kolirn, /
Gemish fun klang, gezang, geveyn un freyd, / Ikh her in
loyterkeyt fun dayne reyd / Mayn mames poshet, kosher harts
vibrirn." When Note Manger's brother read Yehoyesh's
translation of the Bible he sent his brother Itsik the only
poem he ever wrote, "Shprakhn": "Di kleyne feygl afn dakh /
Gibn op tsu got a shvakh -- / Tshirik, tshirik -- in zeyer
shprakh. Di grine zhabes funem taykh / Gibn-op tsu got a
shvakh -- kvo, kvo, kvo -- in zeyer shprakh.       "Ikh
leyen yehoyeshes tanakh / Un gib tsu got borkhu a shvakh --
/ In mame-loshn -- undzer shprakh."

The charming lyricist, Itsik Manger, begins his poem
"Yidish": "Yidish, sheyne printsesin, azoy sheyn vi loshn
koydesh, / Nor yinger."  We sophisticates have to look for
irony and wordplay in Yiddish, but many Yiddish writers
looked and found -- beauty, to use an old-fashioned word.
Manger's Yiddish is a princess, ours a standup comedian.
 
Mani Leyb, in his "Yiddish" makes clear that one loves
one's native language because only through it can we
communicate to oneself and others the shape of one's
feelings and intuitions, the living experiential substance
of one's inner life: "Un yidn redn yidish / Un yidish iz
dokh sheyn / Un gring a tsveytn yidn / Farshteyn vi zikh
aleyn." Just as language makes us human, connecting us to
ourselves and others, so does Yiddish, this very Jewish
language, bind Yiddish-speaking Ashkenazic Jews (only a
half-century ago almost 90% of the Jewish people) to the
Yiddish past and to Yiddish culture.

Especially since the Shoa, Yiddish for many is tied to
_yidishkeyt_ in its various constellations, religious,
national, communal, familial. Again and again the theme of
continuity, of the chain of tradition, is raised by the
poets who survived the Hitler period.  Thus the imagery of
Yoysef Yofe's "Kidesh" is sacramental: "Du gis mir on a
bekher vayn / Un ikh vel makhn kidesh; / Un du, mayn kind,
zog OMEN hoykh / In reynem, gutn yidish. Ikh gib dir fun
mayn kos a trunk, / Un du verst nay geborn; / Mit tener
yidishe in harts -- / Af lange, lange yorn."
 
Let me conclude this second sermon on the evil of
ludicizing Yiddish (which, granted, one is not quite doing
simply by admiring the playful and the self-ironic in
Yiddish) with the last two stanzas of Kehos Kliger's
4-stanza poem "Yidish":  "Yidish, yidish, iz mayn shprakh,
/ Afile ven ikh veyn un lakh / Tu ikh es af yidish.  Alts
vos ba tog ikh trakht / Un alts vos ikh troym ba nakht / Iz
vider nor af yidish.            Iz far yidish -- undzer
shprakh, / Lomir ale shteyn af vakh / Un kegn ale sonim.
Zi vet lebn nokh a sakh / Lange doyres undzer shprakh -- /
Tsu lehakhes ale sonim."
 
                 (End of Part 2)

Yude-Leyb Proger
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol 1.154
 
 
 
 
 
 
