
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 3.160
December 9, 1993

1) Inverted word order (Reyzl Kalifowicz-Waletzky)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed Dec  8 12:09:55 1993
From: Roslyn Kalifowicz-Waletzky <0005943838@mcimail.com>
Subject: Inverted word order

Shleyme Axelrod described the verb argument well when he wrote:

 >The issue now appears to be definitional, so why not drop it?  There is
 >unlikely to be agreement between the two sides on exactly what is meant
 >by "rule", "exception", "license"--perhaps even by "all", "always" and
 >"never".

        There is certainly a lot of confusion here about this issue
and the present stalemate I think is only aggravating things for
more than just the neophytes on Mendele.   Let's see if we could
straighten it out before we drop it.

        In the "Synopsis of Grammar" of College Yiddish on P. 330,
Weinreich names the word order he describes in Lessons 1 and 11 as
"normal word order".  That's the primary rule of the inflected verb
being in second position that the Berman brothers are talking about.
But the issue here is that there are alternate correct word order
constructions besides questions and imperatives in Yiddish which
Weinreich unfortunately does not make explicit in College Yiddish.

        It's understandable that he avoided discussing such
constructions in a primer on the fundamentals of Yiddish. What's
unfortunate is that when he does present inverted word order (the
name this feature has been given) in non-interrogative or imperative
sentences on P.122, it is most unclear and unspecific.  Khaim keeps
on correctly citing the consecutive word order presentation on
p.122, and even lesson 15's samples of such correct constructions,
but the point is not coming across because Weinreich, the Master for
everyone today, didn't make it explicit there.

        People around YIVO have always complained about problems in
College Yiddish, and here is one of them.  First off, the problem is
that when he discusses consecutive word order, he presents 2 cases
simultaneously--the double independent clause sentence and the
single clause sentence.  His only reference to sentences with the
verb in the initial position is found in the example sentence, i.e.,
"hob ikh gevart oyf im" but the explanatory paragraph talks only
about the second clause in the above double-claused sentences.

        Furthermore, citing 3 variations of the question "bistu
gekumen" (which automatically has inverted word order anyway) on
that page doesn't clarify when the question "bistu gekumen?" means
"You came?" and when "Bistu gekumen?" means "So you came?" since
both Yiddish sentences look exactly alike. Giving the English
translation of inverted word order, namely, "So I waited for him."
is not enough to understand how and why the sentences are
constructed the way they are in the sample reading of Lesson 15.

        For literal minded people, I guess Weinreich needed to have
said clearly that here is another legitimate example of inverted
worder order along with questions and imperatives.  My goal here is
really not to tear down College Yiddish, which I love, but citing
P.122 as a place where it is clearly explained doesn't really work.

        The real problem in the discussion here may be that the
nature of colloquial and narrative speech are not understood.
These have their own features and markings.   These markings are not
incorrect or ungrammatical or even manifestations of poetic license,
away from "regulations".  They are different, not better or worse,
from normal word order and they serve important functions for a
variety of narrative and rhetorical strategies. That is, they have
their own grammar just as questions and imperatives do and that
grammar is part of the whole picture of Yiddish syntax.

        Sentences with the verb in initial position is one of the
prominent features of colloquial and narrative speech.  Der
poshetster folksmenmentsh uses it thousands of times every day.  If
you call it "an exemption from grammatical rules", then you don't
understand it, native speaker or not. Native speakers don't have to
understand it. They just have to produce it. And the ability to
produce it requires what Weinreich could not teach in College
Yiddish, and that is intonation.

        As long as he kept to discussions of normal word order,
intonation can be fudged along. The teacher in class easily provides
the examples. When it came to questions, Weinreich later wrote an
article about the the rise-fall intonation feature of Yiddish
questions, but avoided discussing the issue in that chapter I think
because he could not yet render or demonstate it in a textbook.
That's what he left for the teacher and the street where Yiddish
intonation patterns abounded in the late 1940s.  Imperative
intonation is similar to English's. So that's an easy one. But the
intonation of inverted word order is the other ingredient in these
constructions and impossible to explain in a textbook then.

        What throws the Bermans is the fact that the sample
sentences here and other texts are being read and and not heard.
Intonation is what carries it and what renders the preceding
sentence as a modifier of the verb in such sentences we are talking
about-- what lets it make sense.   The role of intonation is even
clearer when we find a group of such verb-first sentences in the
middle of a narrative.  As Khaim quoted Yudl Mark, "Keynmol shtelt
men nit stam azoy dem beygevdikn teyl fun verb oyfn same ershtn ort.
Faran in dem shtendik a gevise kavone ...Reyshis-kol trefn mir es --
bay a lebendikn dertseyln ..."

        You need the live narrator because (s)he will provide the
music/ intonation part of the structure of that narrative.  Why the
Bermans are "tuning out" the music native speakers have in their
head when they see such sentences within their appropriate context,
eyn got veyst.

                If the Bermans think that these constructions are
only literary, then how about certain forms of the conditional?
Weinreich speaks only of regular word order construction in his
discussion of the conditional. But how about this everyday
conversation,

  Mame:  Moyshe, Dovid vil geyn in te'ater un ikh hob nisht keyn gelt.
  Tate:  Vil er geyn, zol er aleyn batsoln.

        Ain't nothin' literary about this conversation.  When you
look at the sentence "Hobn es di tsvey brider gekoyft." out of
context, your conclusion should be that this is a sentence from a
story, from a narrative, either someone is telling of some actual
event or telling a story.  Just because it has been cited in a book
doesn't make it only literary.  S'iz dokh a folksmayse!!!   That
story begins with "A mol is geven..."  An oral telling that's been
written down.

        As for the claim that "to" (tes komets aleph), is implied in
such sentences.  That is not correct despite the fact that "to" is
also translated in Enlish as "so".  What is implied in inverted word
order construction is the word "iz".  Quite often you will hear a
speaker insert this word at the beginning of such sentences and
sometimes not.  But "iz" is what is always implied.

        As for asking native speakers directly about their speech,
Ellen's and Bob's postings remind me of a great story I'll share
with everyone.  At some gathering of linguists for the discussion on
the standardization of Yiddish and the issue of the choice
pronounciations of the word "ikh", someone turned around to the
great linguist and Galitsyaner Birnbaum and said to him, "But you
use "yakh?"  Birnbaum, with mouth agape, in a room with so many
Litvaks, fiercely protested, "Yakh zug yakh? Yakh zug nisht yakh."
My point is you can't directly ask even a great linguist about his
own speech, shoyn opgeret fun a folksmentsh.

        Weinreich didn't have time to show all the syntactic
possibilities available to "dem lebedikn dertsyeler", but just
because he didn't get to it in his prolific but short 41 years
doesn't mean it doesn't exist.  Even Mordkhe Schaechter didn't get
to write about inverted word order in his "Yiddish Tsvey".

        For those not willing to try reading the Yiddish scholarly
writings on this issue cited by Khaim, an excellent English language
analysis of this is available in the article by Josh Waletzky called
"Topicalization in Yiddish" in "The Field Of Yiddish", Vol.4.  I
should note that one of Josh's many informants for what was then a
senior thesis at Harvard was Abe Igelfeld, then down the road at
M.I.T.  My husband long ago left linguistics for film directing so
this is no plug for his career.  I wish I could get him to come on
here himself.  He says that the prime source for material on this
issue is Zaretsky's writings (available at YIVO).

        Jason and Hal Berman: We have some printouts from the
"Topicalization" article. I'll be happy to send you a copy if you
e-mail me your snail-mail address.

Reyzl Kalifowicz-Waletzky

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 3.159

Mendele has 2 rules:

	1. Provide a Subject: line.
	2. Sign your article.

Send submissions/responses to:

        mendele@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

Other business:

        nmiller@starbase.trincoll.edu

Anonymous ftp archives available on:

        ftp.mendele.trincoll.edu
        in the directory pub/mendele/files






