
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 2 no. 109
December 4, 1992
 
1) Sneezing (Nicholas Eshelman)
2) Introduction (Yankl Feldman)
3) Ts as phonaestheme (Norman Zide)
4) Offensive language (Dan Breslauer)
5) Offensive language (Ellen Prince)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 03 Dec 92 13:26:20 CST
From: Nicholas Eshelman <NESHELMA%UKANVM.bitnet@YaleVM.YCC.Yale.Edu>
Subject: Sneezing

Does anyone know why English speakers in the N. E. U.S. (&
other places too, no doubt) DO tend to say something after
a person sneezes (God bless, etc.) but in the Midwest one
says nothing TO the sneezer, and the sneezing party is
expected to excuse himself. Nothing to do with Yiddish, but
I've always wondered.  (My zayde says: "God bless you--if
He has nothing better to do.")

Nicholas Eshelman -- University of Kansas

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 3 Dec 92 12:49:18 PST
From: feldman@math.berkeley.edu
Subject: Introduction / parodies

In connection with Sheldon Benjamin's query about erev
nitl, let me call attention to the work of Milt Gross, who
- in addition to his writings about Looey Dot Dope - wrote
many parodies, not in Yiddish but in Yinglish, among them a
parody of "Twas the night before...". I remember it as very
funny.

By the way, let me introduce myself:Jacob (Jack, Yankl)
Feldman, a Math. Prof. (soon to be Emeritus) at Berkeley. I
was raised in Philadelphia; my parents and their friends
were involved in Yiddish culture (deeply) and leftist
politics (slightly) of the JPFO brand, and some of it
rubbed off on me.

I was grateful for the clarification, or maybe a better
word would be elaboration, of the etymology of those
all-important words "schmuck" and "putz" in recent issues
of Mendele.

Finally, here's a yak from childhood. Riding in an overfull
car on a hot Sunday through slow traffic towards Atlanyic
City, we would pass billboards advertising hotels. Minnie
Silverman , with obvious delight, read aloud two of the
names:"Stacy Trent, Hildabrecht". I was too young to
understand.

Yankl Feldman

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 3 Dec 92 15:17:58 CST
From: n-zide@uchicago.edu
Subject: ts as phonaestheme; tsatske/chachke; sneezes

My doggerel examples - Vol 2, l03 - I realized after I sent
them all contained ts, and Gerald  Phillips, in his welcome
reply (where can I see the dozens of others he mentions ?
who composed them ? who disseminated them ?) gives a nice
example of ts where one wouldn't expect it in 'normal,
colloquial Yiddish' - 'Tsadie' for 'Sadie' - my mother's
name was Sadie, and none of her older - more or less
monolingual (as regards English) Yiddish speakers -
relatives said anything but 'Sadie'. The ts in tsrolley
(with an initial consonant cluster) is even more anomalous.
The translation equivalent in Yiddish of English s is s -
EXCEPT apparently for certain EXPRESSIVE uses in a
conventionalized, comical stage Yiddish dialect of English,
where the 'Yiddishness' (and therefore much of the humor)
is marked - heavily  - by the use of ts and other markers,
e.g. Yiddish e for the vowel in English 'pat' as well as
'pet', and, I suppose, most strongly, intonation - which
doesn't survive non-technical transcription. The ts in
Tsadie is a deliberate, for-comical-purposes,
hypercorrection.

Question: I would like to hear what the (dialectal, or
whatever) distribution of ts versus ch is in
tsatske/chachke (and elsewhere, - which probably
complicates things considerably ) is for Mendelniks. Is
there semantic specialization  for those who use both forms
(distinctively) - in Yiddish , or in Yiddish and English ?
In my (Litvak) dialect the form is always tsatske, which
has a secondary meaning (rejected by some) of an
affectionate diminutive - term of endearment (tsatskele) -
used as a term of address - for little girls. For me
chachka is an English word - of Yiddish  derivation, with
similar meaning, but differences reflecting different
cultural  attitudes toward the objects in question, e.g.
English chachka is more dismissive than Yiddish tsatske.Or
is it ?

Sneezes:  the version I heard - similar in  part to
Albright's and others' - the second part (after tsu lange
yor) is: tsu vaksn, tsu kveln/ a xupele tsu shteln.

Norman Zide

4)----------------------------------------------------
Date: 04 Dec 1992 07:00:04 -0600 (CST)
From: Dan Breslauer <BRESDAN%UKANVAX.bitnet@YaleVM.YCC.Yale.Edu>
Subject: Offensive language

P. Weichsel attributes the casting of derogatory terms into outer
darkness to me.  Not to my credit!  That was Mendele's editor!

My purpose in my posting, however, was to point to the
Hebraic source of the Yiddish expression.  I was not
endorsing its use, but tracing its evolution.  To
paraphrase a well known saying applied to Gershom Scholem:
The use of derogatory sayings is inexcuseable; the study of
the inexcusable is science!

Dan Breslauer

5)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 04 Dec 92 13:22:06 EST
From: "Ellen F. Prince" <ellen@central.cis.upenn.edu>
Subject: Offensive language

i wasn't going to reply to the shikse/sheygets issue, but i
really don't see these as inherently pejorative terms. i
believe the problem is that *what one reported* about
gentile boys and girls was often negative, *not* the terms
used for them. that the term is not pejorative seems to me
especially true for shikse, where the most frequent
collocation that *i* ever heard was _sheyne shikse_, the
epitome of the cute, small-featured, light-complected
debbie reynolds ideal. in fact, since there were so few
light-complected gentiles in my neighborhood (most were
italian, greek, black, or chinese), the term was
*generally* used metaphorically for *jews*. as i may have
already written on this board, i was often called a _sheyne
shikse_ as a child, since i had a small nose and blond
hair. (i remember vividly being troubled by this and asking
whether i was supposed to say _thank you_ in response. my
mother said yes, my father said no.) in any event, it's
hard for me to think of _shikse_ as a pejorative term.
_sheygets_ is more troubling since in fact, most of the
time i heard the term, there *was* something negative being
reported. this is especially true for _shkotsim_, which
nearly always denoted a pack of james- dean-type
'hooligans' from an adjacent neighborhood that would often
hang out around the schoolyard and terrorize the others.
(they belonged to a gang called _pigtown_--how goyish can
you get?!) but the singular was in fact a possible
compliment for a jewish boy, if the boy was
(a)light-complected and with regular features, and
(b)physically fit, especially if also interested in
sports--'oy, iz dos a sheygets, kinehore!'

in a similar vein, i don't think _shvartse_ is inherently
pejorative. what was pejorative was referring to one's
cleaning person by her race, probably since it presumes
that the only people of that race that one interacts with
are maids. (if your teacher and your doctor and your
nextdoor neighbor and your cleaning person were all black
women, you couldn't successfully refer to just one of the
as _di shvartse_--it wouldn't be sufficiently informative
to 'pick out' just one of them.) imagine a situation where
gentiles deal with jews *only* as moneylenders, where all
the jews they know are moneylenders and all the
moneylenders they know are jews. i would imagine they might
then successfully refer to their moneylender as _the jew_.
but i wouldn't want to say that 'jew' is a pejorative term
and should be banished from the lexicon!

in a different but related vein, does anyone share my
intuition that *only* light-complected gentiles are/were
called goyim, shikses, or shkotsim? in my mental lexicon,
italians, greeks, asians, blacks, etc. aren't
'goyim/shikses/shkotsim'--these terms were/are reserved for
irish/anglo/germanic/slavic/baltic exclusively. obviously,
the term was used originally (in yiddish) for
germanic/slavic/baltic people (not too many wasps or irish
in minsk, i imagine) and then got extended here to anglos
and irish. but what was the crucial factor--appearance? or
the property of inspiring fear? (back in brooklyn in the
'40s and '50s, at least, jews didn't fear
italians/greeks/asians/blacks.) i asked my father once if
gypsies were called goyim/shikses/shkotsim and he
laughed--they were certainly not, to his knowledge. but
again we can't tell whether it's complection or the
fear-factor, since they were both dark and apparently
non-fear-inducing... any thoughts?

ellen prince

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol 2.109


