
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 6.003
May 20, 1996

1) Tshatshke/tsatske (Paolo Agostini)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 12 May 1996 19:46:56 +0200
From: pagos@mbox.vol.it
Subject: Nokh a mol iber tshatshkelen

Harvey Spiro in his sagacious posting [5.315] noted:

     Jastrow's 1903 Dictionary of the Talmud cites the word tsa'atsu'im (root
     tsadi-ayin-tsadi-ayin), used in the Tanakh in II Chronicles (3,10), to
     mean "miniatures, babes, dolls." Ignoring the late 20th century slang
     meaning of  "babes," we have a potential source for the [tshotshke = toy,
     knickknack] meaning, plus a potential link to [tsatske = attractive
     female]. The second Hebrew word, sh'a'shu'a (shin-ayin-shin- ayin)
     appears first in Rabbinic Hebrew, according to Jastrow, who cites it in
     Tankhuma, Cant. R. and Pesikta R., meaning "delight, pleasure."

A hartsiken dank to Harvey Spiro for drawing our attention to the Hebrew words.

As a matter of fact the word tsa'atsua' (tsadhe - 'ayin - tsadhe - waw -
'ayin) -- a hapax legomenon in the Bible, occurring Chron. II 3:10 in the pl.
(tse'atsu'im) -- has the meaning of "image work, carving, casting, things
formed by metal-casting" (the meaning in Modern Hebrew is "toy").

There's also a verb, i.e. ts'ts' (tsadhe - 'ayin - tsadhe - 'ayin),
denominated from tsa'atsua. It means  "to adorn, ornament". This verb supplies
a key  to explain the further meaning of "attractive, comely (woman)".

The second  Hebrew word mentioned by Harvey Spiro does not explain the meaning
of "attractive". To wit,  sh'sh' (shin - 'ayin - shin - 'ayin) is the Pilpel
form of the verb shin - 'ayin - 'ayin (="to smooth, to besmear" and "to pat
on" whence the further meanings of "to play (at)" -- e.g. Is 11:8 -- and "to
treat fondly, to caress" -- e.g. Ps 94:18) (see Holliday, W.: A concise Hebrew
and Aramaic Lexicon of the Old Testament. Leiden, 1988).

Therefore the base  sh'sh' (shin - 'ayin - shin - 'ayin) has two meanings:

(A)  'to smooth, to besmear' (although it occurs in the Hitpalpel form only,
in the meaning 'to blind oneself',  lit. 'to paste one's eye, to be stuck shut
-- of eyes' ), as well as

(B)  'to take delight, to delight' -- cp. also the meaning of its Pilpel form
shi'asha': 1. trans. "he delighted, amused, entertained"; 2. intr. "he
sported, played, was amused" (see also Klein, E.: Etymological Dictionary of
the Hebrew Language, Haifa and Jerusalem 1987)

From a strictly semantical point of view, I would discard this base as a
possible origin of the Yiddish word.

Harvey Spiro poses then a very shrewd question: who borrowed from whom?  Was
the source for the Yiddish words Slavic or Hebrew?

What if the source of  both  Slavic and Yiddish was Hebrew?

As a matter of fact,  Slavic languages seem to have preserved several words of
Aramaic-Hebrew (Aramit) origin.

Cp. for example  Slavic *k6lbasa or *klobasa (=sausage) which, in Bernecker's
eyes, originates from Hebrew "kol basar" (approx. "all meat"), although
Bernecker was unable to explain how did the Hebrew compound-word get into
Slavic (see Bernecker, E.: Slavisches etymologisches Woerterbuch. Heidelberg,
1908-1913, I:514) .

The Slavic word "beseda" (=speech) possibly belongs to the same layer. Its
etymology is unknown to date. Yet, IMHO, it could be related to Hebrew
"beseder" (= in order, arranged). "Seder" in Post-Biblical Hebrew had the
meaning of "succession, sequence, arrangement, order" (this is why the word is
used as  name of each section of the Mishnah). And a speech is nothing but a
succession of arguments put into a certain order.

The loss of the final consonant both in "kolbasar" and "beseder" is evidently
due to the well-known fact that in earlier times the Slavic languages
preferred words having "open" syllables (i.e. syllables ending with a vowel).
In loanwords, this phenomenon caused the apocope of the ending consonant of
words.

Even a "typically Slavic" word like kosa ~ kasa  (=scythe)  is probably
related to the Aramaic, Syriac and Hebrew verb QSX  (i.e. khaph - samekh -
cheth),  the meaning of which is "to cut off, trim, mowe".

The same applies to the Slavic verb  kopati  'to hoe, hack', which is possibly
related to the Hebrew verb QFX (i.e. qoph - phe - cheth) 'to beat, strike'
(cp. also Hungarian kapa 'hoe, hack').

The  Slavic word  kopac^  'a tool to fallow the land, to break the soil'  is
probably an early borrowing from Hebrew qofits 'hatchet, chopper' (the latter
deriving from the verb QFTS, i.e. qoph - phe - tsadhe,  'to chop, cut').

As concerning the concordance of Hebrew  tsadhe versus Slavic tsh, we have to
remind that the tsadhe was used and  pronounced as an emphatic _s_, to say it
could easily turn into a tsh. Further evidence is supplied by medieval Hebrew
sources,  e.g.  the Turkish dignitary title of "talmatsh" (~ "tilmatsh") was
translitterated as teth - lamadh - mem - tsadhe (!).

Incidentally, the agro-technical words mentioned above show that  the ancient
Slavic peoples were probably taught basic agricultural practices by the Jews.
*** How and when did these borrowings take place in the Slavic languages? H
Baratz maintains that in the oldest Russian writings of a legal character
there are Hebrew, mostly Biblical-Talmudic elements, and that these go back to
Khazar times. Thus the fact that early Russian codes, including the "Zakon
sudni liudem" ("Law for the Judging of the People"), contains traces of Mosaic
and talmudic legislation, is due not to contact with the Catholic West, as has
also been maintained, but to the influence of the Jewish Khazars. This view
has been characterized by a Russian academician  (I. V. Yagich) as "a scarlet
thread for everyone to walk by"  (Encyclopaedia Judaica , "Khazars", p. 948)

N. Golb and O. Pritsak supplied further evidence to  the presence of Khazarian
Jews in Kiev during the last years of the 9th century, i.e. when the bulk of
Slavic wordstock -- and the Russian state -- were "in statu nascendi". It is
common knowledge that before the Rus' conquered Kiev, the city was under
Khazarian administration (Golb-Pritsak: Khazarian Hebrew Documents of the
Tenth Century. Cornell University Press, 1982).

IMHO the  Slavic word for _tshatshke_ is most likely a Hebrew loanword. There
is an open question, though. Is the Yiddish word a Slavic loanword, or does it
belong  to the most ancient layer of the Yidishe mameloshn instead?

Any comments would be appreciated. Kindest regards

Paolo Agostini
Padova, Italy

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 6.003

