
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 3.042
June 22, 1993

1) Yiddish, the 15th Slavic Language (Bob Hoberman)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue Jun 22 17:26:39 1993
From: Robert D Hoberman <RHOBERMAN@ccmail.sunysb.edu>
Subject: Yiddish, the 15th Slavic Language

I've been holding off on commenting on Paul Wexler's proposals
because I too have not yet read his more recent publications.
However, I did read his 1990 book "The Schizoid Nature of Modern
Hebrew: A Slavic Language in Search of a Semitic Past", and heard
him give a lecture on the same at the 1990 meeting of the Israel
Association for Theoretical Linguistics.  Let me assure everyone
that this kind of topic is not what we call theoretical linguistics.
Many people who heard the talk wondered why Wexler was allowed to
speak on that subject at that meeting.  I think I was the only one
there who took his ideas at all seriously; coin- cidentally (NOT), I
think I was the only one there who understood what he was saying.

Before getting into the details, I want to react to some comments of
some of the Mendelnikes who've been discussing this.  It's not
precisely the case that Wexler is "a highly regarded linguist"
(Zachary Baker).  Most linguists who've heard of him RECENTLY must
think he's a crackpot.  I agree with everything Ellen Prince and
Khayim Bochner have said about how typically Semitic Israeli Hebrew
is (roughly as Semitic as modern Aramaic, Amharic, etc.) and how
typically Germanic Yiddish is (more so than English), and with
Khayim's comment: Wexler's notion that Hebrew is Yiddish and Yiddish
is Sorbian etc. "sounds too implausible to be interesting".  We
all have so much to read that we're forced to triage.

I have a feeling, though, that Wexler's article and book probably
really are more interesting than they sound.  Wexler is extremely
knowledgeable about Hebrew, Yiddish, Slavic, and lots of other
topics related to Jewish languages.  His article "Jewish Inter-
linguistics: Facts and Conceptual Framework" in the journal LANGUAGE
57:99-149 (1981) displays total mastery and is as much a
starting-place for further research in the field as the works of Max
Weinreich, though in a different way.  It's his more recent
activities that appear to have gone off the deep end.  Those who
want to look into the Pavlo Slobodjans'kyj incident that Reyzl
Kalifowicz-Waletzky mentioned can look in LANGUAGE 64 (1988):761-
766 (Slobodjans'kyj's review of the volume Origins of the Yiddish
Language ed. by Dovid Katz), the editor's "Correction" in LANGUAGE
65:921 (1989), and the editor's final "Apology", 67:114 (1991).
Editors concluded that Wexler had written the review and passed it
off as the work of the non-existent Slobodjans'kyj. Wexler would not
normally have been allowed to review the book because he wrote one
of the articles in it: "Reconceptualizing the Genesis of Yiddish in
the Light of its Non-Native Components".  If he wrote the review
pseudonymously, that's cheating.  And if he risked alienating the
editors of LANGUAGE, that's dumb.


As I see it, Wexler's idea as of 1990 was a matter of definition,
and not really empirical at all.  It's a matter of what happened
when Yiddish speakers created modern Hebrew.  He thinks there was a
continuum between normal everyday Yiddish with its Hebrew component,
the Yiddish of scholars with a much greater proportion of Hebrew,
the highly Yiddish-influenced Hebrew that such scholars used on
occasion, 19th-century literary Hebrew, and Israeli Hebrew.  In
other words, the shift from Hebrew-influenced Yiddish to
Yiddish-influenced Hebrew was in his opinion not sudden and sharp
but rather gradual.  Another way of look at it is to compare the
shift from Yiddish to Hebrew with the shift from Yiddish to English
in America.  Yiddish-speakers were so heavily outnumbered by native
English speakers that their children ended up speaking essentially
the same English as everyone else.  But in the case of Hebrew, there
were no native speakers of Hebrew for the first generations of
former Yiddish speakers to merge with.  So Wexler says that what
happened is different: they replaced the elements of their Yiddish,
the words, grammatical structures, etc., PIECE BY PIECE with Hebrew
elements: relexified and regrammaticized their Yiddish.  Not all the
elements, just the vast, overwhelming majority!  So Israeli Hebrew
is "really" Yiddish, says Wexler.  And likewise Yiddish is Slavic.
It's all a matter of terminology.  Even if ALL the elements had been
replaced, and Israeli Hebrew were entirely made up of pre-existing
Hebrew bits and pieces with no Yiddish influence WHATSOEVER, it
would make no difference to his claim. The discernable Yiddish
elements in Israeli Hebrew are just icing on the cake.

Wexler is not the first to point to "Yiddish Influences on Israeli
Hebrew"; there is an excellent, perceptive article of that title by
Haim Blanc in one of the early Field of Yiddish volumes.  Though
Wexler's thesis (Hebrew=Yiddish=Sorbian) itself was not especially
important, he says a lot of very interesting things (in his 1990
book) about the actual processes of language shift and language
planning that created Israeli Hebrew, and about which surprisingly
little good work has been done.  A real history of Israeli Hebrew
has not yet been written.

Philologos and the discussion on Mendele suggest that Wexler has now
moved on to a claim that really is factual: that most of the Eastern
European Jews and their culture came from the southeast, not the
west.  I have no idea whether this has merit. As Reyzl showed us,
there is an awful lot to learn about cultural history.

But Reyzl: is your name Kalifowicz (from the Arabic khali:fa
'Caliph'?) evidence for Wexler's thesis?!

On other topics:

Philologos: es past shoyn nisht.  If you're reading MENDELE, tell us
who you are -- we're among friends.  You don't have to reveal
yourself in the Forward.  Don't just lurk here eavesdropping when we
talk about you.

RE: Yoshke pandres.  I always prefered my family's folk etymology:
Pandora's.  Where all the tsores came from.

Bob Hoberman

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 3.042

