
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 6.278
April 4, 1997

1) Yiddish Studies in Israel IV (Leonard Prager)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 26 Mar 97 23:48:26 IST
From: rhle302@uvm.haifa.ac.il
Subject: Yiddish Studies in Israel IV

The Electronic Age

Yiddish studies in Israel are thriving and will continue to do so
because of the high motivation of its practitioners and the great
opportunities offered by Israel's libraries and archives (of Itsik
Manger, Meylekh Ravitsh, Dov Sadan, Avrom Sutskever, etc.).  (9)
Significant, too, are the new technological resources at the
researcher's command:  on-line searches, the ability to consult the
catalogs of virtually every major world library, the availablilty of
huge data bases and cumulative bibliographies on CD-ROM, not to
mention microfilms, microfiches, sophisticated copying and fax
machines, electronic mail, networking, periodic meetings, etc.  The
World Congress of Jewish Studies, which meets every four years in
Jerusalem, has numerous sessions devoted to Yiddish language and
literature.  At the last meetings, a central theme was the Linguistic
and Cultural Atlas of Ashkenazic Jewry , the first volume of which has
since appeared (to be followed, we are promised, by seven more).  This
is surely the most ambitious Yiddish scholarly project ever attempted.
Thanks to decades of hard work and preparation and to fruitful
cooperation between American and German Yiddishists, the project is on
the highest level of linguistic geography and dialectology.
Generations of scholars will consult this seminal work.

Now, the Old News

Twenty years ago I published my first reflections on the subject of
Yiddish in the academy, focusing on a few, now commonplace,
ironies.(10) These have not worn thin in two decades, but the world in
which we perceive them has changed substantially.  I wrote at that
time:

"Among many older and younger Jews, there is today a certain awareness
of Yiddish as one of the great monuments of the past millenium of
Jewish life.  This awareness often includes the sense of a tragic
rupture with the past and reveals an effort to somehow relate to that
past. Post-Enlightenment ideological issues have lost their relevance,
thus facilitating the objective study of Yiddish and Yiddish
literature.  At the same time the relevance of such study, focused as
it is on the past, continues to be questioned."(11)

As long as there was an Eastern European hinterland with a vibrant
Jewish life, diasporan and even Palestinian secularist Yiddishism
(e.g., of the Left Poalei Zion brand) seemed to be a viable way of
remaining a Jew in the modern world.  With the physical destruction of
most of Eastern European Jewry, this brand of Jewishness lost much of
its raison d'etre, even though scattered groups of individuals
continued to pattern their lives in the spirit of rational
progressivism and Yiddish-language ethnicity.  The Yiddishist
scholarly enterprise,too, lacked the sense of historical connectedness
and community once it nestled in the aloof academy.

I noted, too, as so many observers continue to do, that the one
segment of world Jewry which lives in Yiddish, the ultra-Orthodox (or
charadim as they are called in Israel), are, as ever, indifferent to
the great Yiddish cultural renascence of the past hundred years.  In
that earlier essay I dwelt at length on the quantitative growth of
academic Yiddish programs and courses throughout the world on the one
hand, and on the other, the actual paucity of high-level advanced
studies in Yiddish and the difficulties which determine this scarcity.
"Yiddishist" today is generally taken to be someone who specializes in
Yiddish (cf.  _zamler_ in American Jewish parlance, once 'book
collector', today 'one who rescues Yiddish books (for others to
read)'.  In Israel the renativization of Hebrew was a resounding
success; in the Diaspora Jewish languages everywhere declined in the
face of increased integration or assimilation.  Yiddishland, once the
largest contiguous area of any European language -- from Holland to
Siberia -- shrank to a few ultra-Orthodox reservations in Jerusalem,
Bnai Brak, Williamsburg (New York), Stamford Hill (London) and a few
other places.  Since then Yiddish has continued to thrive among those
who reject the world and decline among the world-affirming secular
Jews, the thrust of whose cultural renaissance was to live in the
world among the nations but in their own thousand-year old tongue.

University of Haifa

                               Endnotes

1. See Arye Pilovski, _Tsvishn yo un neyn_, chapter 4.

2. Leonard Prager and David L. Gold, "Hebrew-Yiddish Relations in
Israel," _The Jewish Quarterly_ 1988, vol. 35, no. 22, p. 46.

3. In eulogizing him in _Di goldene keyt_ 1990, vol. 128, p. 5.

4. English title:  _Studies in Jewish Culture in Honour of Chone
Shmeruk_ (edited by Israel Bartal, Ezra Mendelsohn, Chava Turniansky,
Jerusalem, 1993).  Six of the essays are in English, twelve in Hebrew,
and one in Yiddish by the present chairperson of the Department of
Yiddish of the Hebrew University, Chava Turniansky, who was herself
trained by Shmeruk, and who authored the twenty-five page Shmeruk
bibliography in the volume.

5. Word play on the similar-sounding _Talmud_ and _talmid_.

6. See his "Problems of Reversing Language Shift," _Di goldene keyt_
1990, vol. 130, pp. 6-16 [in Yiddish]; _Reversing Langage Shift;
Theoretical and Applied Foundations of Asssitance to Threatened
Languages_, London:  Multilingual Matters, 1991.

7. See Alexander Beider, _A Dictionary of Jewish Surnames from the
Russian Empire_, Teaneck, NJ:  Avoteynu, 1993.

8. One of them was Johannes L. Brozi, who wrote "A gebentshter ziveg
fun a yortsendlik" in _Di goldene keyt_ 1992, vol. 133, pp. 199-201;
other non-Jews have also written for this Israeli Yiddish quarterly.

9. The Yiddish archivist at the National Library in Jerusalem is the
Yiddish (and now also Hebrew) writer Yosele Birshteyn, who is in many
respects a "discovery" of the influential Hebrew critic Menachem
Perry. Birshteyn may stand as a symbol of a new Hebrew-Yiddish
symbiosis.

10.  See "Yiddish in the University," _The Jewish Quarterly_ (London)
1974, vol. 22, nos. 1-2, pp. 31-40.

11.  Reprinted in _Never Say Die_, p. 532.


References

Novershtern, Abraham.  "From the Folk to the Academics:  Study and
Research of Yiddish after the Hololcaust," _Encyclopaedia Judaica
Yearbook 1988/1989_, Jerusalem:  Keter, 1989, pp. 14-24.

Pilovski, Arye.  _Tsvishn yo un neyn; yidish un yidish-literatur in
erets-yisroel, 1907-1949_, Tel Aviv:  World Council for Yiddish and
Jewish Culture, 1986.

Prager, Leonard.  "Yiddish in the University," in Joshua A. Fishman,
ed., _Never Say Die!  A Thousand Years of Yiddish in Jewish Life and
Letters_, The Hague / Paris / New York:  Mouton, 1981, pp. 529-545
(reprinted from _The Jewish Quarterly_ 1974, vol. 22, nos. 1-2, pp.
31-40.

Prager, Leonard.  "Hebrew-Yiddish Relations in Israel,", _The Jewish
Quarterly_, 35:2 (1988), 46-50 (with David L. Gold).

Roskies, David.  "The Emancipation of Yiddish," _Prooftexts; A Journal
of Jewish Literary History_, 1981, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 28-42.

Shmeruk, Khone.  "Yidish in universitetn," _Di goldene keyt_ 1971,
vol. 91, pp. 39-48.

Postscript:

1. The editors of _La Rassegna Mensile di Israel_ preferred the
conventional forms of Yiddish names over the standard Yivo
romanization, e.g Sholem Aleichem rather than Sholem Aleykhem; Avraham
Sutzkever rather than Avrom Sutskever.  There is a real dilemma when
the writer himself prefers a spelling which does not conform to Yivo
rules.

2. The editor of _Haifa Studies in Jewish Theater and Drama_ (JTD)
recently announced that, notwithstanding its original intentions, the
journal would be devoted to drama in general.

3. Technological aids:  the recently announced electronic pen
(scanner, memory chip with huge glossaries) which translates French,
German, Spanish, Hebrew and potentially many other languages from and
into English may someday help students in reading printed Yiddish
texts. Again, the question arises (as it has over the problem of
fonts), how many gadget-savvy Yiddish-users are there?  Will Yiddish
interest really profit from technological advances in the absence of
crucial socio-cultural conditions?

Leonard Prager

                        [end of Part 4]

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 6.278

