Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 1 no. 132
January 5, 1992
 
1) Farshidene inyonim (Bob Goldberg)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 3 Jan 92 15:32:20 PST
From: xidak!poseidon!bob@uunet.UU.NET
Subject: tsurik "online" mit nisht kayn broyges

For the past few months I've been involved in a
work-related "crunch" and have not had time to read my
MENDELE mail.  Last night I caught up on my reading (Vol. 1
no. 88 to 130).  Here are my comments on the past few
months' discussions.

Ellen Prince: Yes, now that you mention it, I heard both
"nokh" and "nukh", and I never heard "zul" for "zol", etc.
All of your examples are "right-on" as far as my
recollections go.  Could we be related?  But seriously, now
that my grandparents are gone, I'd like a reference on how
to pronounce Yiddish as they did, mer uveynig.  Is there
such a thing?  If not, have you thought about annotating
Weinreich's dictionary?   One lead I've heard is that
people in the Yiddish theatre in NY used a similar dialect.
Another is that you can sometimes tell from rhymes in songs
and poetry, e.g., in the song "khanuke":

	khanuke, oy, khanuke, a yontif a sheyner
	a lustike, a freylikhe, nito nokh azoyner

the author must have pronounced "sheyner" to rhyme with
"azoyner" -- I would guess "azeyner", or maybe it was
"shayner" and "azayner". [YIVO: "ay" is a long "i", "ey" is
long "a", "oy" as in "oy vey"].

Mikhl Herzog: I admit to being put-off by your initial
unsupported denial that the German "heiraten" has Yiddish
origins, because you initially offered no evidence in
support of your own negative assertion.

With regard to the onus of proof in such matters: As a
scientist, I am used to the idea that anyone who states a
theory, positive OR negative, can (and should) be called
upon to back it up.  In logic, whether one asserts 'A' or
'not A', a proof is expected.  There is a big difference
between challenging an assertion and making one's own,
negative assertion.  Mikhl's negative assertion without
evidence sounded to me as though an expert was telling the
non-expert readers to keep quiet lest they be shouted down.
Anyway, I was glad to see an alternative derivation in a
later discussion (though it did not convince me).

By the way, I take it as given that the German dictionary
writers have a bias against citing a Yiddish origin of a
German word.  I believe that Webster's refused to
acknowlege Yiddish-origin words in English as late as the
1949 edition (they cited Germanic origin).  Modern
Webster's acknowledges Yiddish as the "probable" origin.
For examples, look up words beginning with "sch".

So, Mikhl, what about the German "lashe" for the tongue of
a shoe?  If you assert that this word did not come into
German from Yiddish-speaking shumakhers, what evidence do
you have?  If you could prove, for example, that the word
was in Germanic languages before the Jews arrived in
Germany, that would completely convice me.

In regard to the discussion about gutteral "ayin":  When I
first learned the Hebrew alphabet, I didn't understand why
an alphabet would have two silent letters--aleph and ayin.
The explanation that made the most sense to me was that the
ayin originally had a sound.  The evidence for this is that
Arabic still has a "gutteral" letter that has no Hebrew
equivalent, and it is the initial letter in the name of the
geographic region called "Gaza" in English (note the "G")
and "aza" in Hebrew (beginning with an ayin).  I have heard
an Egyptian Jew pronounce it, and it sounds like he's got
something stuck in his throat.  Mikhl, you have my
permission to tear this theory apart, but please, no flat
denials.

With regard to "bal mitzvah": My grandmother from "noy
shtot", Poland (near Krakow) consistently said this, and
spelled it either beys-lamed or beys-alef-lamed in Yiddish.
I wondered about this also.

In regard to words ending in ayin getting an English "y"
ending --  I have always heard this from non-native
speakers trying to insert Yiddish words into an English
sentence.  I never heard my grandparents (native speakers)
use the "y" endings on any of these words.  My parents
(from Brooklyn) used the "y" ending on only two of the
cited Yiddish words, and ONLY when the words were in an
English sentence:  "tushy" and "bubby".

Tushy was usually applied to a child's anatomy, and was
always "tukhas" in a Yiddish sentence.  "tukhas" has got to
be from the Hebrew, "takhas" (under). We've really hit
bottom if we allow "kish mayn tushy" as Yiddish.  Give me a
break!  And I never heard "tush" used in a Yiddish sentence
either.  "tush" always seemed like an adult version of the
Anglicized "tushy", sort of like "piss" is the adult form
of "pee", but in Yiddish it's "pish". [No, I'm not claiming
that the English word "piss" derives from "pish".].

As for "bubby", this was always used similarly to "dear" or
"honey" (my parents called me "Bobby, bubby" as a child),
and never for the real "bobe" (we pronounce it "bube").
And in a Yiddish sentence, it was always "bubele".

On the use of "bubele" as a genderless term of endearment:
My bobe used to call me and my sister "tatele" and "mamele"
all the time.  She would mix the gender on these words,
frequently calling me "mamele".  When I was old enough to
understand these words, I would correct her and tell her
that I am a "tatele" because I'm a boy.  But I always
thought that the gender-mixing usage could explain how a
man can be a "bubele".

A random guess about gender-mixing is that it was
superstitious -- "kayn ayin ha ra".  If you call your young
grandson "mamele", the evil eye will be confused, and this
counteracts the fact that you're anticipating the fine day
that he'll be a father, which might tempt the evil eye to
prevent this outcome.  So call him a dear little mother,
and send the evil eye on a wild goose chase!

And this brings up my final comment in this now rather long
message:  Use of "kayn" without "nisht".  Obviously the
expression "kayn ayin ha ra" (no evil eye) (pronounced
"kayn-e hora" or "ken-e hara") is a counter-example to the
claim that "kayn" is never used by itself.


                       ... Bob Goldberg

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol 1.132

