
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 3.039
June 21, 1993

1) Yehudit (Leonard Prager)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun Jun 20 16:24:23 1993
From: LEONARD PRAGER <RHLE302@HAIFAUVM.BITNET>
Subject: YEHUDIT

Dear Mendelniks:

We take pleasure in inviting you to become a founding member of
Yehudit - International Association for the Study of Jewish
Languages (IASJL).*

Enclosed please find 1) the association's statement of purpose and 2) a
registration form, which we kindly request that you fill in regardless
of whether or not you agree to join the association at this time.

Respectfully yours,


      Joseph Chetrit                     Leonard Prager

*The proposed association succeeds but is not a continuation of the
Haifa-based
Association for Jewish Languages (ASJL), which ceased to function in
1988.
                            *****
                                     Please circulate.

Yehudit:
International Association for the Study of Jewish Languages (IASJL)

"and they could not speak the language of Judah (i.e. Yehudit)"
(Nehemiah 13:24)

1.  The Background to Establishing the Association

By the end of the twentieth century, the traditional Jewish
languages spoken during the past millenium by numerous Jewish
communities had undergone a marked decline as living natural
communal languages.  In the State of Israel, Modern Hebrew took the
place of these languages, assuming the roles of both communal and
national tongue not only for the young and the native-born, but for
innumerable immigrants -- primary speakers of diasporan Jewish
languages who settled in the Jewish homeland in the past half
century.  In the Diaspora, the triumph of secularization and the
concomitant spread of general education in Jewish communities,
including highly traditional ones, led to the gradual abandonment of
Jewish languages and the adoption of the national vernaculars and
the modes of speech of the surrounding cultures.  Yiddish alone has
held on as as a living, natural, multi-generational language in
certain communities in Israel, North America and Europe, especially
among the ultra-Orthodox.

Alongside the gradual decline in the use of Jewish languages has
come an increasing academic and research interest in them. A rich
scientific literature has grown up, one which probes the inner and
outer linguistic history of the Jewish people and related groups.
Pioneering work has been done in Yiddish and Judezmo, and we are now
seeing promising research in other Jewish languages, Jewish Arabic
in particular.

This heartening progress notwithstanding, no international
academic-scientific body exists to encourage, support and correlate
further research in the still largely untapped field of Jewish
languages.  Nor is there any institution or association devoted to
the tasks of publishing research findings or of assisting
universities in planning and giving courses in this field.

Those in Israel and abroad who are engaged in research in Jewish
languages will agree that more can be done by working together than
by working in isolation.  We need to stimulate academic interest,
encourage the establishment of research centers and, most
immediately, create a high-level refereed multi-lingual annual, as
well as a monograph series.

To accomplish the latter goals, we shall canvass a number of
reputable publishers and also turn to Jewish cultural and
educational bodies in and outside of Israel for financial support.

2.  The Association's Aims

a.  Furthering research in all aspects of Jewish languages --
grammatical, socio-historical, pragmatic, stratificational, historic
(inner and outer), semantic, rhetorical and other;  informing
students of specific Jewish languages of the findings of their
colleagues studying other Jewish languages;  encouraging the
development of a discipline of Jewish linguistics; rescuing from
oblivion printed sources, manuscript material and, especially, oral
evidence.

b.  Establishment of a refereed multi-lingual annual.  It is
proposed that the annual, like the association, be named "Yehudit."
While this term in its original biblical sense refers to Hebrew,
virtually all subsequent Jewish languages were called "Jewish" and
included Hebrew-origin words.

c.  Encouragement and support of research and teaching of Jewish
languages in universities in Israel and abroad through lecture
series, conferences and other means.

3.  Organization of and Membership in the Association

Membership in the IASJL will be open to academic researchers and
students of Jewish languages, literatures and cognate fields, as
well as to those interested in the cultivation and dissemination of
Jewish languages.

A General Meeting of the IASJL will be held in Jerusalem once every
four years at the time the World Congress of Jewish Studies takes
place.  The General Meeting will elect a Chairman, Vice-Chairman,
Secretary and Treasurer, as well as three additional persons, all
seven constituting the Executive Committee. They will be elected for
four years with the possibility of reelection for a single
additional four-year period. The Executive Committe will do all in
its power to realize the declared aims of the Association; it will
be responsible for the day-to- day running of the Association.

If sufficient interest is shown in establishing the Association, a
meeting will be called of all founding members.  This meeting will
be empowered to register the Association as an "amuta"  = Ottoman
Society|.  Until the initial General Meeting takes place, the
Association's address will be the University of Haifa.

                          *****
Yehudit - International Association for the Study of
Jewish Languages (IASJL)

DATE:


TO:  Prof. Joseph Chetrit / Prof. Leonard Prager
        Faculty of Humanities
        University of Haifa
        31905 Haifa, Israel


Name:

Home address:

Telephone:

Work address:

Telephone:

       Fax:            Telex:              EMAIL:

I would / would not (circle whichever applies) like to become
a founding member of
Yehudit - International Association for the Study of Jewish
Languages (IASJL).

My comments and suggestions regarding the proposed association and its
aims:





                                                SIGNATURE:


                           *****
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 3.039

