Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 1 no. 148
January 28, 1992
 
1) Bird-watching (Yude-Leyb Proger)
2) Mostly Shakespeare (Yude-Leyb Proger)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 26 Jan 92 12:06:55 IST
From: leonard prager <RHLE302@HAIFAUVM.BITNET>
Subject: bird-watching

To Noyekh shames
Re: vol. 1, no. 130
 
Noyekh shames hot gemakht pleyte un valgert zikh arum in di
velder.  Af di eltere yorn gevorn a leydik-geyer un kuk im
on -- gevorn a feygl-onkuker.  Ver volt es gekholemt az
undzer tmimesdiker shames farnemt zikh mit histakles-tsiporim
gesheftn.

Minestam iz er a gants feiker feygl-zeer: "Ver es ken gut
toyre iz an emeser roye veeyno nire."  Bikhdey tsu zayn a
guter feygl-observirer, darf men kenen "nemen di oygn in di
hent" -- ober nisht, kholile, onshtrengen di oygn.  Ikh
shtel zikh for az Noyekh "batrakht dem foygl fun ale zaytn
vi men batrakht an esrog."  Noyekh iz avade a shporevdiker,
vayl "far onkukn tsolt men ka gelt nit."  Efsher vet dos
feygl-beobakhtn {= daytshmerish} im nit shotn, vayl "Fun
zen iz nokh keyner nit blind gevorn."  Kh'ob ober moyre
Noyekh vet zikh kholile arumshpanen begile-rosh oder efsher
zikh farkiln. Zol er haltn in zinen, "Az du kukst af hoykhe
zakhn halt zikh tsu dos hitl." Zol er nor umkern tsu undz
mit frishe koykhes. Ikh meyn az in a vaytern numer veln mir
muzn arumredn dem inyen "Yidish un natur-terminologye."
 
Yude-Leyb Proger (Leonard Prager)


2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 26 Jan 92 12:05:49 IST
From: leonard prager <RHLE302@HAIFAUVM.BITNET>
Subject: nunnery

 
To Mikhl Herzog
Re: vol. 1, no 20
 
Please forgive me, Mikhl, for not responding to your
comments of vol. 1, no. 20, which I have now received
together with other back numbers.
 
1) I accept your justification of the one-word gloss
'pretender' for _mekhutan_.
 
2) How might one say 'pretender to the throne' in Yiddish?
My first (impulsive) list included the following:

_der tronzukher_, _der tronmoner_, _der kise-hamlukhe
zukher_, der kise-hamlukhe moner_; _der pretendirer afn
tron/afn kise-hamlukhe_; der pretendent (from NHG der
Praetendent).  Then I took a look at Stutshkov (Oytser, p.
464), who gives: _(tron-)pretendent_, _pretendirer_.  I
think that either -pretendent- (despite its similarity to
the NHG word) or _pretendirer_ are quite satisfactory, and
I am ready to squash my innovations.

Nothing is easier, of course, in the event that one cannot
find a translation equivalent, than paraphrasing -- which
is what dictionaries do when they get stuck. A _pretender_
is thus "eyner vos taynet az davke er iz der emeser
yoyresh-etser."  The Hebrew _yoresh-etser_ 'heir-apparent'
(Ashkenazic Hebrew YOYresh ETSer) is perfectly good
Yiddish.  Perhaps the _pretender_ might also be called _der
kloymershter yoyresh-etser_. I am sure that the above does
not exhaust the possibilities, since Yiddish, like English,
is component-rich and register-rich.
 
3) With regard to your Shakespeare "query":

a) Ber Lapin translated Shakespeare's _Sonnets_ (New York:
Bloch, 1953) -- a bilingual edition introduced by your
friend Shmuel Lapin.  If Shakespeare wrote any ballads,
they have not been found.  (In undzere yorn ver hot nit ka
ketsishn moyekh?)
 
b) Shmuel Lapin's proposed retort for Ophelia to Hamlet's
"Get thee to a nunnery! is _a klug vort, a khokhme_ and
were Ophelia _a yente_ (not in the etymological sense), it
would be apposite as well.  Shmuel Lapin, in his "mit
eytses-toyves, adoyni prints, bin ikh shoyn, borekhashem,
bazorgt," must be credited for capturing an authentic voice
-- but not Shakespeare's!  For one thing, a glance at the
text shows us that Hamlet's remark doesn't call for a
reply.  "Get thee to a nunnery" are the first five words
that Hamlet speaks to Ophelia in an eleven-line prose
address (3.1.122-133), which ends with the sudden and
dramatically significant question , "Where's your father?"
Ophelia's answer, "At home, my lord," is seen by Hamlet as
a lie, especially in productions where Polonius is shown
peeking over a curtain.
 
c) Many commentators on "Get thee to a nunnery" hear a
double-entendre on the word _nunnery_, one of whose slang
meanings in Elizabethan English was 'brothel'.  Hamlet, in
his sick animus against womankind could conceivably, at
least metaphorically, turn Ophelia into a whore -- but not
into _a yakhne_!
 
d)  Yiddish translations of Shakespeare run the gamut
between the superb (e.g. Shmuel Halkin's _King Lear_,
Moscow: Der emes, 1937) and the hilarious (-skekspir
fartaytsht un farbesert_).  The Yiddish translation of
Shakespeare's _Hamlet_ that I happen to have at hand is by
Yisroel-Yankev Shvarts {Israel Jacob Schwartz 1885-1971},
author of the epic poem _Kentuki_ ('Kentucky') and in the
view of Dov Sadan, the best Yiddish translator after
Yehoyesh (translator of the Jewish Scriptures).
Shvarts'_Hamlet_ is one of the two relatively decent
published Yiddish translations of this classic work (the
other is by Y. Goldberg, Minsk 1935).

But the closer one looks at Shvarts' _Hamlet_ the more one
becomes aware of its shortcomings.  One is not happy with
its old-style _Forverts_ spellings, its many daytshmerisms.
In short, like so many translations, it seems dated, though
how to translate Shakespeare today into a modern Yiddish
poses almost insuperable problems -- mainly because of the
absence of a substantial native-speaking cultured secular
audience and the absence of the talented translator who
could create a meaningful poetic text in a viable Yiddish
free for the most part of the (in themselves marvelous)
folk rhythms of Sholem-Aleykhem and yet not hopelessly
synthetic.

It is just as well that the few active Yiddish repertoire
theaters concentrate on original Yiddish works. Enterprises
such as that of the Long Island group that performs Gilbert
and Sullivan operas in Yiddish -- despite the declared
admiration of Isaac Asimov and others, the good intentions
of the performers, the pleasure given to audiences -- has
little to do with Yiddish culture and is somehow related to
the widespread and most undesirable phenomenon, the
ludicization of Yiddish (see my piece "Ludic Yiddish" in
_Mendele_).  Even when it is a little hard to keep a
straight face, let's take the subject of Shakespeare in
Yiddish seriously.
 
e)  To get back to "Get thee to a nunnery!"  Y.-Y.
Shvarts's "Fershlis zikh in a nonenkirkh" seems weak in
several respects (in addition to losing the possible pun on
_nunnery_).  Standard Yiddish (henceforth StY) requires
_farshlis_, but the verb itself is pleonastic since a
nunnery is a place of self-confinement.  Moreover, a
nunnery is not 'a nun's church', although nunneries (such
as the Carmelite Convent a few blocks from which I am now
writing this) generally include churches on their grounds.

There are several good Yiddish words for 'num' --
_monatshke_ and _gots-kale_ are fine (see Stutshkov,
Section 618: Galkhes) though the second is generally used
ironically, which is right for this instance. The command
"Get thee" is meant to be demeaning.  How do the following
sound to your practiced ear?  1)  "Klayb zikh ariber tsu di
monatshkes!" 2) "Farnem-zikh tsu gots-kales!"  3) "Gey
ariber tsum monatshkes-hoyz!" The skilful translator will
keep on working until he finds the right phrasing -- very
hard work indeed!
 
4) Zay mir gezunt un shtark!  And warm greetings from your
friends Kieve and Shifra Ziv whom I just saw while visiting
a mutual friend at the Carmel Hospital.  How, incidentally,
do you say _quadruple bypass_ in Yiddish?  My suggestion:
"Nit af undz gedakht."

Yude-Leyb Proger {Leonard Prager}
______________________________________________________

End of Mendele Vol 1.148
 
