
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 4.087
August 17, 1994

1) Electronic On-Line _LCAAJ_ Archives (Andrew Sunshine)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 17 Aug 94  15:38 EDT
From: ansur@cuvmb.Columbia.edu
Subject: Electronic On-Line _LCAAJ_ Archives

1. I'd like to open and close this message by thanking all those who have
so far responded (either on Mendele or to Mikhl Herzog and me) to my
previous posting on the subject of a proposal to transform the Archives
of the _Language and Culture Atlas of Ashkenazic Jewry_ into an
electronic on-line data archives.

2. Re: Ellen Prince's suggestion that the goals of computerizing the
LCAAJ Archives be streamlined at this stage, "leaving out, for the first
stage at least, the dialectological tagging/addressing." There's no
question that the task of preserving the _LCAAJ_'s interviews on other
media is extremely urgent since the reel-to- reel tapes on which they
were originally recorded are anywhere from 20 to 35 years old and no
systematic set of duplicate tapes exist. If measures to preserve the
tapes are not taken soon, then we will begin to lose interviews; in
losing interviews we lose what may be the only systematic representation
we have of the Yiddish of particular locations in Europe. The
preservation of all 600 Atlas interviews (an estimated 6000 hours of
tape) both in a reel-to-reel analog tape master and in a digitized,
computer-stored version is a task that cannot wait.

However, our intention in digitizing the interviews is to combine the
goal of preservation with that of access. To be sure, to tag all 600
interview/6000 recorded hours in addition to digitizing them is a
humongous task. (It is, more precisely, an OPEN-ENDED task, as I shall
explain shortly.) While the preservation task is paramount, it also seems
to be in the interest of our long range goals to demonstrate the
viability of electronic access. Thus, our intention, for the more-or-less
immediate future, is to do the tagging for 100 of the interviews, as
well--in effect, to create a kind of usable skeleton of the Yiddish
language map to be filled in progressively, but perhaps never to be
completed so long as there are students of Yiddish.

Ellen Prince's note suggests that she sees a distinction between
dialectological and other kinds of tagging of the data, e.g., syntactic.
If there is anything to such a distinction, then perhaps my reference to
"covert dialectological issues" in my original posting was an unfortunate
choice of words. In other words, the _LCAAJ_ data is intended to be
representative of Yiddish in its geographic variation, and accordingly
lends itself to such study-- but not only to such study. It is amenable
(in principle) to whatever interests researchers bring to their scrutiny
of the data.

Indeed, it has already happened at least once in the course of processing
the interviews that issues not found on the original list (the so-called
"Index to the Dialectology" or ID) and not used in the construction of
the field questionnaire but suggested by the data were added as matters
worthy of future exploration. (_LCAAJ_ Volume II due out this fall
includes the original "Index to the Dialectology" and the addenda
[Chapter V].) And it will certainly happen again. (It is in part because
we anticipate such additions and amendments to be made on a continual
basis as the data is intensively studied that database will be an on-line
resource, rather than a fixed entity to be disseminated on CD Rom.
Continual development of the archives is very much a part of the
conception.)

In short, we look forward to the introduction of whatever sort of
syntactic tagging you may have in mind (it hardly needs to be mentioned
that the world of syntactic theory has changed since the original list of
issues was drafted by Uriel Weinreich in 1959).

All of this is perhaps nothing more than a long-winded version of Dovid
Braun's remark: "... the dialectological aspect of the Atlas ... is the
core of the Atlas!"--using the word "dialectological" to refer to the
conceptual/analytical categories for studying the interviews. In other
words, the field questionnaire was designed to elicit short answers on a
variety of topics, both overt (Q: VOSER HOBN YIDN GEREDT? A: YIDISH) and
covert (ID 110: typical development of Yiddish Proto-vowels 32, 33; and
ID 302: functional status of _j_ before _i_--both of these bearing on the
renditions of YIDISH). (Compare the rather different focus of oral
history interviews and the consequent structure of oral history texts.)

While Dovid's contribution to the discussion is basically on the mark, it
doesn't take into account (because I hadn't been sufficiently explicit on
this point in my original posting) our intention of including the audio
recordings in the on-line database and of affixing the tags to segments
of these recordings (and secondarily to the transcripts). Thus, accurate
though his comments may be about Atlas transcriptions in general and the
absence of transcriptions longer than a phrase in particular, they don't
in themselves disqualify Professor Prince's interest in running text.
Moreover, if the audio recordings are available, then there seems to be
no reason not to turn to the interviews as a possible source of running
text--whether that is taken to refer to the text of individual responses
to questions or to an interview conceived as a whole text.

Even so, the Atlas is, as Dovid aptly characterizes it, a "plotting
tool," rather than a corpus of running text. That is, the data lends
itself to the sort of research in which the investigator wants to know
how a given question (or perhaps set of questions) was answered at all
interview sites, rather than to research in which the investigator wants
to know how all the questions were answered at a single location.
However, the real-time sequence of information on the recordings as they
are now stored would better serve the purpose of the latter (hypothetical
approach) than the former. The best way to facilitate retrieval of
parallel responses to single questions (or parallel instances of a given
linguistic phenomenon) is to introduce paths of electronic access. Among
other things, this will benefit those working on further volumes of the
book-form Atlas.

3. See 1.

Andrew Sunshine

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 4.087

A Table of Contents is now available via anonymous ftp, along with weekly
updates.

Anonymous ftp archives available on:
          ftp.mendele.trincoll.edu
          in the directory pub/mendele/files

Archives available via gopher on:
        gopher.cic.net

Mendele has 2 rules:

	1. Provide a meaningful Subject: line.
	2. Sign your article.

Send articles to:
        mendele@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

Other business:
        nmiller@mail.trincoll.edu


