
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 5.091
August 20, 1995

1) A protest brivl (Leybl Botvinik)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 20 Aug 95 10:02:51 IDT
From: leybl@telecomm.tadiran.co.il
Subject: A protest brivl, far ayer informatsie

tayere khaveyrim mendelyaner,

ikh gib aykh do iber a kopie fun a protest-brivl vos ikh hob geshikt tsu
a groyse yidishe ('Jewish') federatsie vos diskriminirt kegn yidish. gute
yidn hobn ibergelozt gelter fun zeyere yerushes far algemeyne yidishe
tsvekn. ver es vil iberlozn gelt in der tzevoe far spetsifish yidish
proyektn oder institutsies zol oysfirlekh un genoy oyshraybn tsu vemen di
gelter zoln ahinkumen, vayl undsere 'gute' federatsies hobn yidish in
drerd. vi es zol nit zayn, vintsh ikh aykh un unds alemen lange, gezunte
un sheferishe yorn, un a gut zis yor. a gemar khsive un khsime toyve.

leybl botvinik
netanya

Karen Adler, Chair
Legacy Fund Committee,
UJA-Federation of New York
130 East 59th Street,
New York, N.Y. 10022

A personal, open letter to the Board and Officers of the NY-UJA,
and to the Legacy Fund Committee:

Dear Karen Adler,

    It has come to my attention, that a very modest project proposal
which I had been instrumental in preparing and presenting, has been
rejected on the basis of it dealing with the preservation and promotion
of the Yiddish language and culture among young people in Israel. All my
information seems to point to the Legacy Fund Committee practicing a very
destructive form of discrimination.

    I understood, from an excellent source, that in other project
proposals over the years requesting aid for Yiddish-oriented projects in
Israel, a similar rejectionist attitude has governed the decision making:
Yiddish is important, but ... has the lowest possible priority... One
begins to question where the hearts and souls of leading Jewish community
leaders and organizations lie... But then, I shouldn't be surprised,
Jewish community leaders, Rabbis, etc have been helping to bury Yiddish
in North America for decades. I am writing this letter, not in the name
of the organization I prepared the proposal for, but rather in my own
name, as a personal protest. I do not fear expressing myself openly
against the self-hatred of Jewish organizations and individuals who help
in the continued destruction of the Yiddish language and culture either
actively and directly, or passively and indirectly.

    Yiddish has played a major role in Jewish life in the past, both in
Israel and in the Diaspora, and will continue to do so.  It has been
said, that the Jewish People is a mirror on the state  of World affairs.
It has also been suggested, that the state of Yiddish reflects the state
of the Jewish People. Look around you, at the sorry state of American
Jewry, and think about that!

    There is a strong need to preserve and promote the welfare of the
Yiddish language and culture. First and foremost, because it is an
important part of our heritage. Secondly, because our People -- the
Folk-people, especially the young, want it and need it.

    The proposal which was made was for Educational Multimedia Computer
Programs in Yiddish for Students, to be used by the over 3000 elementary
and high-school students studying Yiddish in over 55 schools in Israel
(Note that the given figures are constantly increasing with more schools
added from year to year). The very fact, that young people have an
interest in, and want to learn Yiddish (in Israel) is noteworthy, and
should be studied in its own light.

    Just three weeks ago, -- to relate a similar occurance,-- an other
rejector of Yiddish almost 'got away with murder':  The city of Netanya
has had, for the first time ever, a school with two classes in Yiddish
introduced to 5th and 6th graders (30 students total). Next year, they
will again be allocated this tiny allowance of 4 weekly hours.   A second
school principal has also opened his doors, and has been granted 4 hours
too by the Yiddish department of the Ministry of Education of the State
of Israel.

    The 'Mefakakhat' (inspector) supervising the elementary schools in
Netanya, had not known, that the first principal had introduced Yiddish
in mid-year. When having heard of the double request for teaching
Yiddish, she immediatly forbade it, stating that Yiddish will not be
taught in her diys 'more important things' than Yiddish.  If Jews were to
think in this manner consistently, we would have assimilated into
non-existance as a Nation over 3 millenia ago.

    An inquiry was immediatly made, and steps taken to stop the
inspector's rejectionist policy. She claimed, that she knew Yiddish, even
'loved it'... (we all know that old adage: 'some of my best friends are
Jews...'). She went on to say, that despite her own Yiddish background
there was really no need for the study of Yiddish. In short, a backlash
prevented her from stopping the teaching of Yiddish in Netanya. Quite
simply: the success of the first classes, and the high motivation of the
students. The crucial and deciding factor was, that the students' (and
parents') educational wishes and needs come first.

    In  the past few months, a proposal has been floating around the
Israeli Parliament, -- the Knesset, -- to introduce a special committee
under the Ministry of Education to deal with the preservation and
promotion of the Yiddish language and culture (a parallel proposal was
made for Ladino). Over 30 Knesset members, representing all the major,
and most of the minor parties took part in the 3 readings.

    The consensus was: 'al khet she khototi' (= for the sin I have
sinned) against the Yiddish language and culture. Flowery speeches and
promotional promises were made, as well as expressions of remorse over
the harm which has been done to Yiddish by Jew and non-Jew. Statements
promoting Yiddish were made by the Left, as well as the Right; by the
Ultra-orthodox and non-religious; even by Arab MKs. It is expected, that
the new law will pass within the next few weeks.

    I'm just sorry about one thing in this whole deal: that the amount
requested in the Legacy proposal, which was rejected, was for a mere
$100,000, and not for the hundreds of millions of dollars that is, by
virtue of tragic historical circumstances 'owed' by the Jewish and
non-Jewish world to the legacy, -- Past, Present and Future -- of the
Yiddish language and culture.

    For your information, I am including an example of a more ambitious
and serious project proposal -- the Centre for Yiddish Techno-Newware --,
which I present as the first of 3 major projects for the future of
Yiddish.

    And, as to the rejectionist policy vis-a-vis Yiddish:

            di komitet megt zikh shemen!
            (= the committee ought to be ashamed of itself!)

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 5.091

Mendele has 2 rules:

	1. Provide a meaningful Subject: line
	2. Sign your article (full name please)

Send articles to:
    mendele@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

Send change-of-status messages to:
    listserv@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

        a. For a temporary stop: set mendele nomail
        b. To resume delivery: set mendele mail
        c. To subscribe: sub mendele first_name last_name
        d. To unsubscribe kholile: unsub mendele

Other business:
    nmiller@mail.trincoll.edu

              ****Getting back issues****

1. Anonymous ftp archives are available.

ftp ftp.mendele.trincoll.edu
    in the directory pub/mendele/files

    A table of contents is also available, along with weekly updates.

2. Mendele archives can also be reached as follows:

via WWW:
    http://sunsite.unc.edu/yiddish/mewais.html

via gopher:
    gopher://sunsite.unc.edu/11/../.pub/academic/languages/yiddish/mendele

via ftp:
    ftp://sunsite.unc.edu/pub/academic/languages/yiddish/mendele



