
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 5.276
March 11, 1996

1) Sholem-Aleykhem's _Kenig Pik_ (Part 5) (Leonard Prager)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 13 Feb 96 21:42:39 IST
From: rhle302@uvm.haifa.ac.il
Subject: Sholem-Aleykhem's _Kenig Pik_  (Part 5)

                                  5


The trilingual (and multidialectal) situation dramatized in _Kenig Pik_
and its more developed twin (or second act), _Shrage_, is not unique to
these plays; but nowhere has Sholem-Aleykhem more exuberantly given
comic expression to the complex linguistic realities of his world.
Sholem-Aleykhem was a trilingual writer in an Eastern Ashkenazic
trilingual intellectual community.  This linguistic situation inevitably
bred certain tensions, especially with the growth of Jewish national
consciousness.  In _Kenig pik_ the daughter Berte says to one of her
parents' guests:

        "Kakaya blazhenstva"? <lakht> Hot mir nit kin faribl nit, vos
        ikh vel aykh fregn: Lemay zolt ir zikh banutsn dafke nit mit
        ayer eygn loshn?  Mir dakht, az s'iz fil glaykher redn rekht
        yidish eyder shlekht rusish...."(31)

        ('Kakaya blazhenstva'? <she laughs> Please forgive me, but I
        must ask you something: Why don't you speak in your own
        language?  It seems to me that it makes far more sense to speak
        good Yiddish than bad Russian....')

In homiletical writings (e.g.  _Vayikra raba_ 32:5) one often encounters
the claim that the Jews in Egypt survived because "they did not change
their names."  This is surely a "homily appealing for the retention or
giving of Hebrew names, in view of the prevalent tendency of adopting
foreign ones" [see "Names," _Encyclopaedia Judaica_ 12:807].
Sholem-Aleykhem, like the rabbis, is aware of the symbolic and real
import of given and family names.  In _Kenig Pik_, as in other plays
(e.g.  _In tsveyen a zeks-un-zekhtsik_ 'A Two-Handed Sixty-Six'), the
matter of names is directly aired.  Khane, the mother, hears the
doorbell ring and says, "That must be Grisha."  Berte replies, "Hersh
loynt dir nit?  Dafke Grisha?"  ('Hersh isn't good enough?  Does it have
to be Grisha?')  The onomastic struggle continues when Berte is
addressed as _Bertetshka_.  The following dialog ensues:

        Berte:  Ershtns, nit Bertetshka.

        Ershter gast: To yest, vinovit, Berta Izrailevna...

        Berte:  Un nit Berta Izrailevna, nor Bashe Bas-Yisroel.  Nito
        vos tsu shemen mit an eygenem nomen.

        ('Berte:  First of all, not Bertetshka.

        First Guest: <In Russian> That is, excuse me, Berta
        Izrailevna...

        Berte:  And not Berta Izrailevna, but Bashe Bas-Yisroel [in
        speaking Hebrew with Grishe, she would, of cousrse, say Batya
        Bat-Yisrael -- LP].  No reason to be ashamed of one's own
        name.')

Berte's various names reflect the linguistic complexity of her world.
She has a traditional Yiddish name, _Bashe_ (< Hebrew _Batya_) with the
additional diminutive forms _Bashke_ and _Bashenyu-; a parallel form of
_Bashke_ is _Basye_.  She also has a European Yiddish name, _Berte_.  In
the dramatis personae and in real life _Berte_ (which, according to
emigrants from the former Soviet Union to whom I have spoken, is
invariably borne by Jews) is the name she would have used most, being a
city girl and somewhat sophisticated.  She would also hear this name
spoken in various diminutivized forms of Russian origin, such as
_Bertetshka_ and _Bertusya_, as well as the somewhat russianized _Berta_
(as used by First Guest).  In her Hebraist organization she is doubtless
Batya (though conceivably some speakers may have said _Basya_.  In
insisting that she is _Bashe Bas-Yisroel_, Berte is identifying herself
only as her father's daughter (his name is Yisroel), but as the daughter
of the Jewish people - - in keeping with her nationalism.

Berte here speaks not only as a nationalist but as a linguistic purist.
She scorn First Guest's "bad Russian."  Indeed, if our standard is
literary, upperclass varieties of Russian, the guest's speech is
substandard, therefore "incorrect."  A few substandard usages suffice in
a literary or dramatic work to color a character's entire speech.  But
we can hypothesize that _Jewish Russian_ (like _Jewish English or _Black
English_) has its own norms.  _Jewish Russian_ would encompass those
varieties of Russian unique to certain though not all Russian-speaking
Jews and its Jewish features woould not be uniformly present in all the
registers of these speakers.  First Guest's _kakaya blazhenstva_ is a
typical Jewish-Russian pronunciation of the period.  There is a large
literature in Russian by Jews for Jews which can be regarded as
Jewish-Russian by virtue of its themes, its points of view, its tone;
this literature probably has distinct linguistic features as well and
merits linguistic analysis.

Sholem-Aleykhem was much aware of the interaction between the languages
of his world.  _Kenig Pik_ has a number of instances of heavily
Slavic-influenced Yiddish.  Second Guest's _Yak reydele to reydele, abi
dobre meynele_ ('The intention counts, not the works') is a widely used
Yiddish proverb which Ignatz Bernstein in his _Juedische Sprichwoerter
un redensarten_ (Warsaw, 1908, p. 269, no. 16) traces to the Jews and
peasants of Podolia.  Bernstein cites the proverb in a slightly
different form:  _Redele yak redele, abi dobre meynele_.  _Yak_, _abi_
and _dobre_ are good Yiddish words, but _yak_ and _dobre_ carry a
stronger Slavic favor than _abi_, which has been more fully integrated.
Uriel Weinreich in his _MEYYED_ gives _abi_ of course, does not give
_yak_, and has _dobre_ only in the lexeme =dobre-mazl_ 'luck'.  Fourth
Guest's "Odnim slovom __ hashiveynu nazad!" is a perfect instance of
Jewish Russian.(32) No Gentile speaker of Russian would understand this
utterance, anymore than a Gentile American would grasp the Jewish
English question, "What shul does your zeydi davn in on shabes?"  Fourth
Guest "blends" the Whole Hebrew liturgical _hashiveynu_ 'return us' with
the Russian word _nazad_ 'backwards' to stress his views that the
Hebraists are reactionary and obscurantist and endanger the assimilatory
hopes of his class.  The coupling of the Jewish and the general terms
creates an original and distinct Jewish-Russian lexeme whose meaning has
the emotional force of 'they're trying to put us back into the Middle
Ages.'

Examining the Goodblatt manuscript of _Kenig Pik_ we notice how
Sholem-Aleykhem added more vowel signs in red to phonemic spelling of
Hebrew in the "Sefardic" pronunciation to make certain the comic effect
would not be lost.(33) If researchers had taken the pains to compare the
Folksfond Edition of _Kenig Pik_ with the version in _Der groyser
kundes_, they would have discovered the differences between them.  Had
they searched in the Sholem-Aleykhem Archives, they would have found
letters explaining this difference.  But without the Goodblatt
manuscript, without additions and corrections in the author's own hand,
we would not have been certain that _Der groyser kundes_ printed _Kenig
pik_ as Sholem-Aleykhem wanted it __ funnier and livelier than when
first conceived and, despite its Yehupetz (= Kiev) setting, appropriate
even forthe Jews of New York City, whose heavily English-influenced
Yiddish he would come to satirize no less than the Russian of his
"aristocrats" in _Kenig Pik_.(34)

Leonard Prager

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 5.276

Mendele has 2 rules:

	1. Provide a meaningful Subject: line
	2. Sign your article (full name please)

Send articles to:
    mendele@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

Send change-of-status messages to:
    listserv@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

        a. For a temporary stop: set mendele nomail
        b. To resume delivery: set mendele mail
        c. To subscribe: sub mendele first_name last_name
        d. To unsubscribe kholile: unsub mendele

Other business:
    nmiller@mail.trincoll.edu

              ****Getting back issues****

1. Anonymous ftp archives are available.

ftp ftp.mendele.trincoll.edu
    in the directory pub/mendele/files

    A table of contents is also available, along with weekly updates.

2. Mendele archives can also be reached as follows:

via WWW:
    http://sunsite.unc.edu/yiddish/mewais.html

via gopher:
    gopher://sunsite.unc.edu/11/../.pub/academic/languages/yiddish/mendele

via ftp:
    ftp://sunsite.unc.edu/pub/academic/languages/yiddish/mendele



