
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 6.011
June 9, 1996

1) Buenos Aires, two years after the bombing (Part 1) (Zachary Baker)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 7 Jun 1996 21:36:02 -0500 (EST)
From: yivo1@metgate.metro.org
Subject: Buenos Aires, two years after the bombing (Part 1)

This past Tuesday (June 4th) I returned from a ten-day trip to Buenos
Aires, as a follow-up to my earlier visit there, in late November 1994.
The latest trip was organized by Bradley Berman, curator of traveling
exhibits at the Judah L. Magnes Museum (Berkeley, Calif.), and was made
possible through funds provided by the Peter Gruber Foundation, with a
grant given in honor of Eduardo Elsztain of Buenos Aires.  The immediate
purpose of the visit was to conduct a survey of 67 oil paintings,
watercolors, and drawings by the Polish Jewish artist Maurice Minkowski
(1881-1930), belonging to the Argentine branch of YIVO (known by the
acronym IWO in Spanish) and having miraculously survived the July 18,
1994 bombing of the AMIA building, in which IWO was housed.

Our three-person delegation consisted of James Bernstein, a prominent
San Francisco conservator of modern paintings, Brad Berman, and me.  Jim
Bernstein coordinated the examination of the Minkowski paintings, and
enlisted Brad and me to assist in various technical capacities.  (As an
experienced photographer, Brad took many of the pictures that will be
used in analyzing the physical state and conservation needs of the
Minkowski artworks, and as a librarian I organized much of the
record-keeping.) Our work was greatly facilitated by our hosts, Moishe
Korin (president of the Fundacion IWO's board of directors and head of
the Argentine Va'ad ha-hinukh [Jewish Education Council]), Abraham
Lichtenbaum (director of IWO), and Ester Szwarc (head of IWO's library
and archives).  Thanks to their help, the work at hand was successfully
completed and we were able to establish contact not only within the IWO
circles, but among Argentine art conservators, journalists, and
(akhron-akhron-khoviv) philanthropists.

_Why Minkowski?_

After my 1994 visit to Buenos Aires, a couple of questions came to mind:
(1) How can we help IWO rebuild its shattered library and archives?  (2)
What can be done to ensure that the memory of the July 18, 1994 bombing
of the AMIA building -- in which at least 86 individuals lost their
lives -- not be erased from memory?  It will take some time for both
questions to be answered satisfactorily.

(1) IWO has conducted some emergency fundraising, and libraries abroad
have supplied useful reference books, in response to pleas for
assistance. Much remains to be done in that area, but for the time being
the bulk of IWO's surviving library and archives remains packed in boxes
and stored off-site (IWO is currently based in the Kultur-Kongres
building, at Ayacucho 483), awaiting the day when the institute can move
back into the reconstructed AMIA building (about that, more in Part 2).
A crew of volunteers, under the guidance of Ester Szwarc, is sifting
through the collections, the major effort to reconstitute the IWO's
research and circulating collections and make them accessible appears to
be a couple of years down the road.  Nevertheless, material and
financial assistance toward this ongoing effort is welcome.

(2) Over the past two years, Jews have endured a number of traumatic
terrorist incidents -- of which the Hamas suicide bombings earlier this
year in Israel are the most recent bloody examples.  But in certain ways
the bombing of the AMIA stands out -- in terms of the number of lives
lost, the target itself (the Buenos Aires equivalent to the Federation
of Jewish Philanthropies, with other charitable and cultural
organizations housed alongside), and the strong sense that the culprits
will not be searched out and that justice will never be served.  Yet
that terrible act -- which came on the heels of the bombing of the
Israeli embassy in Argentina, in 1992 (with close to 30 fatalities) --
is in danger of being forgotten by all but those who were closest to the
scene itself.

Maurice (Maurycy, Mauricio, Moishe) Minkowski was once a famous painter
in Jewish art circles.  His images of Jewish suffering in the wake of
Russian pogroms and of traditional Polish-Jewish scenes (especially the
religious and domestic lives of Jewish women in Poland) were widely
reproduced and exhibits of his artworks were held throughout Poland, as
well as in London, Berlin, and Paris.  In style he was closer to the
realistic painters Maurycy Gottlieb and Samuel Hirszenberg than to his
avant-garde contemporaries, Marc Chagall and Chaim Soutine.  But after
his death, this once-renowned artist faded into oblivion.  Still, his
paintings are found in numerous museums and private collections, the
world over.

By a quirk of fate, IWO in Buenos Aires probably possesses the largest
single collection of artworks by Minkowski.  The artist, accompanied by
his wife and brother, arrived in Buenos Aires during the late (southern
hemisphere) winter of 1930, in order to mount an exhibition of his
pictures at a local gallery.  About three months after his arrival, in
late November, Minkowski -- a deaf-mute since early childhood -- stepped
out into the street and was fatally struck by a car.  (This is not
necessarily to imply that those in full possession of their hearing are
immune to traffic accidents of this sort -- especially not in Buenos
Aires!)

Minkowski's death was front-page news; the Jewish Daily Forward, for
example, ran its obituary -- together with the artist's photo -- right
below the masthead.  Photos of paintings by Minkowski appeared in that
same issue and in the Forward's Art Section, the following Sunday. (If
nothing else, this attests to the fact that reproductions of Minkowski's
pictures resided within the newspaper's photo morgue.)  Another
newspaper report that I have read states that after Argentina Minkowski
and his entourage (plus his pictures) were to have continued on to
Brazil and New York, returning from there to Warsaw, and ending up in
Palestine.  In any event, the tour was aborted in Buenos Aires, where
the pictures that Minkowski brought along with him remained until about
ten years after his death, when close to 70 of them were acquired by
IWO.

Together with Neil Zagorin, of the National Yiddish Book Center, I first
encountered these pictures as they being cleaned by an Argentine art
conservator on November 22, 1994, almost exactly 64 years after
Minkowski's fatal accident.  (I was familiar with a black-and-white
album of Minkowski's works, published by IWO during the 1950s, but had
never seen them up close and in color.) The drama of the scenes depicted
in them and the circumstances under which their restoration had been
suddenly rendered necessary were the impetus behind the trip which has
just been completed. Upon my return from Buenos Aires, at the end of
1994, I communicated with colleagues in the Jewish museum world about
what I had seen there, and a report that I wrote was circulated by the
Council of American Jewish Museums.

Shortly after the July 18, 1994 bombing of the AMIA building, the Judah
L. Magnes Museum, in Berkeley, California -- its staff being aware of
IWO's collection of Minkowskis -- brought out from storage its two
paintings by that artist and put them on display, in a symbolic act of
solidarity with the victims.  About six months later, in connection with
another project, Brad Berman was visiting YIVO on behalf of the Magnes
Museum.  There we discussed the notion of a project connected with
restoration of IWO's Minkowskis.  The aim of the still vaguely
conceptualized project was -- and remains -- that a traveling exhibit
involving some of the restored pictures might eventually take place;
that the reputation of a once famous but now forgotten artist might
thereby be restored; that the public at large would be reminded of the
terrible consequences of the AMIA bombing; and that IWO's role as
custodian of Argentina's Jewish and Yiddish heritage would be recognized
and celebrated.  A Minkowski exhibit and catalogue could serve as
reminders of an event from which the Argentine Jewish community has yet
to recover.

The groundwork has been laid for further progress on this project.  The
staffs of IWO in Buenos Aires and the Magnes Museum in Berkeley are
carefully considering the next steps, in what promises to be a series of
tasks that will take years to complete.  Each task, once completed, will
bring the parties concerned closer to the goals just enumerated.

In Part 2 of this report I will focus on my experiences in Yiddish
Buenos Aires during this recent trip.

Zachary Baker

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 6.011

Mendele has 2 rules:

	1. Provide a meaningful Subject: line
	2. Sign your article (full name please)

Send articles to:
    mendele@yalevm.cis.yale.edu

Send change-of-status messages to:
    listserv@yalevm.cis.yale.edu

        a. For a temporary stop: set mendele nomail
        b. To resume delivery: set mendele mail
        c. To subscribe: sub mendele first_name last_name
        d. To unsubscribe kholile: unsub mendele

Other business:
    nmiller@mail.trincoll.edu

              ****Getting back issues****

1. Anonymous ftp archives are available.

ftp ftp.mendele.trincoll.edu
    in the directory pub/mendele/files

    A table of contents is also available, along with weekly updates.

2. Mendele archives can also be reached as follows:

via WWW:
    http://sunsite.unc.edu/yiddish/mewais.html

via gopher:
    gopher://sunsite.unc.edu/11/../.pub/academic/languages/yiddish/mendele

via ftp:
    ftp://sunsite.unc.edu/pub/academic/languages/yiddish/mendele



