
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 4.361
March 10, 1995

1) Mameloshn 95 (Stephen Dowling)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 9 Mar 1995 18:46:32 -0500
From: stdowling@aol.com
Subject: Mameloshn 95

MAMELOSHN 95
A Yiddish-Speakers's Paradise!
May 26-29, 1995
Organized by Workmen's Circle Hemshekh Branch 105

     MAMELOSHN 95 is a three day visit to Yiddish Land! An unprecedented
opportunity to dance, sing, eat, learn, play, love, even dream, in Yiddish.
At MAMELOSHN 95 Yiddish is a thriving contemporary language. Some of the most
active representatives of the Yiddish movement will conduct programs ranging
from "Yiddish Computing" to "How to Romance in Yiddish." At MAMELOSHN 95
you'll find an open, engaging atmosphere that will encourage  personal
exchanges, the practice and sharpening of Yiddish skills, and new Yiddish
speaking friends... MAMELOSHN 95, the Yiddish event of the Season!


ON THE PROGRAM

CLASSES:

IDIOMATIC EXPRESSIONS THAT ONE WILL USE OVER THE WEEKEND. Students will
have the ability to practice useful phrases on a variety of topics.
Combining grammar and vocabulary in a fun way, with conversational
practice. Led by Sheva Zucker.

"DANCING ON THE CEILING" (Traditional East European Jewish Dance)
Experienced dance instructor and researcher Michael Alpert teaches the
Jewish wedding dances traditionally done to Klezmer music: the freylekhs,
sher, bulgar, and others.  The line, circle, and partner dances create
the framework for the knock-your-sox-off social experience that is
Yiddish celebration at it best!  Musical accompaniment is provided by the
other three members of Brave Old World. Led by Michael Alpert.

THE YIDDISH OF 1995. Looks at Yiddish as a current, living language.
Learn how Yiddish is constantly changing. Led by Mordkhe Schaechter.

YIDDISH FOR BEGINNERS. Know a little Yiddish and want to add to it? Don't
know any and want to see if Yiddish is for you? This is the class for
you! Led by Pessach Fiszman.

WORKSHOPS:

Yiddish and Computers:

MENDELE - Yiddish On-line with Noyekh Miller What it is. How to get on.
What it does for you. Who is on there with you.

YIDDISH WORD PROCESSING - The programs you need to produce Yiddish
documents for PC & Mac. Led by Martin Deutsch & Reyzl Kalifowicz-Waletzky

YIDDISH TEACHERS WORKSHOP. Whether you are an experienced or future
Yiddish teacher, the Teacher's Workshop is keday. Ellie will demonstrate
a variety of techniques for integrating grammar, conversation, reading
and writing in an elementary Yiddish class, and instruct participants in
the how-to's of curriculum planning. Includes a copy of the Workmen's
Circle Curriculum Guide for Yiddish Teachers prepared by Ellie Kellman
and Miriam Steinberg. Led by Ellie Kellman.

WONDERS OF YIDDISH FOLKLORE: "DEMONS, SPIRITS & IMPS" and "LOST TREASURES
OF YIDDISH FOLKLORE" Led by Miriam Hoffman.

FOLKSONGS OF THE YIDDISH WORKERS MOVEMENT. A social history of Eastern
European Jewry through its vocal music.
Led by Shulamis Dion.

HOW TO ROMANCE IN YIDDISH. Terminology of love, marriage, sex, and
endearment. Sources include folksongs, proverbs, and actual experience.
Led by Reyzl Kalifowitz-Waletsky.

FOUND TREASURES:YIDDISH WOMEN'S LITERATURE. Readings and analysis with
special attention to the following themes: political life, gender
relations, parents and children. Material will be drawn from the recently
published book of Yiddish Women's literature "Found Treasures." Led by
Frieda Forman & Ethel Raicus.

EVENING PROGRAM

YIDDISH CABARET featuring: Naomi Hirsch, Rhoda Bernard, Phyllis Berk and
Elena Ovstrovsky accompanied by Benyumin Schaechter Jeff Warschauer. M.C.
: Branch 105 Chairman Corey Breier.

KLEZMER DANCE featuring BRAVE OLD WORLD.

Also planned:
Shabbes program led by Michael Baran. A Yiddish film to be announced.
Yiddish sing-a-long, sports and games and a Yiddish scavenger hunt with
Yiddish cultur al and literary clues.

CHILDREN'S PROGRAM
Our creative and innovative program will include games and sports in
Yiddish, a "Wheel of Fortune", a Yiddish Talent show, Jewish Holidays
Treasure Hunt and a "Trip to Yiddishland"  Led by Kolye Borodulin and
assisted by Eve Goodman.

ABOUT THE PRESENTERS
Michael Alpert was raised in a Yiddish-speaking family and is
internationally known for his performances and recordings of Yiddish and
klezmer music with Kapelye, Brave Old World,  and The Krakauer Trio.
Considered one of the finest traditional Yiddish singers of his
generation, Michael has conducted extensive research of folk music and
dance in Jewish communities throughout the United States and Europe. A
research associate in ethnomusicology at the YIVO Institute for Jewish
Research in New York and co-director of Buffalo on the Roof, an annual
Yiddish folklore camp in West Virginia, he has taught traditional singing
and dancing at Living Traditions' KlezKamp and the East European Folklife
Center's Balkan Music and Dance Workshops for many years. Michael is
featured in the klezmer documentary A Jumpin' Night in the Garden of Eden
and BBC-TV's "Fiddler on the Hoof," and sings on the Grammy-nominated
soundtrack recording from the film Partisans of Vilna.

Phyllis Berk is a graduate of the Workmen's Shule movement and has
appeared in numerous Yiddish shows including the musical "The Golden
Land." In addition to Yiddish song, she is also a Jazz stylist and
combines both traditions in the newly released "Coming of Age: Phyllis
Berk takes Yiddish Song Mainstream.

Rhoda Bernard sings Jewish music in Yiddish and Hebrew, jazz, cabaret,
and musical theater repertoire in concerts throughout New England and New
York.  She performs regularly with the klezmer bands Klezamir and The
Boston Kleztet, has appeared as guest vocalist with The Klezmer
Conservatory Band and with The Shirim Klezmer Orchestra, and frequently
gives concerts of Jewish music with piano or guitar accompaniment.
Rhoda's theatrical credits include leading mezzo-soprano roles in many
musicals and operettas, and she currently appears in musical revues as
part of The Musical Theater Company of The New England Arts Alliance.
Rhoda holds degrees from Harvard University and New England Conservatory
of Music.  In summer 1994, Rhoda studied Yiddish language, literature and
culture at the Uriel Weinreich Summer Program sponsored by the YIVO
Institute and Columbia University.

Kolye Borodulin was born and raised in Birobidzhan and is a graduate of
the Khabarovsk Teachers College. Kolye is a former student of the YIVO
Summer Program and received his M.A. from Columbia University in 1993.
Kolye has taught Yiddish at the Birobidzhan Teachers College, Bnai Brith
Summer Camp, Mid-Town Workmen's Circle Shule and The Workmen's Circle
adult Yiddish class.

Brave Old World: Hailed by New York's Village Voice and The Washington
Post as "a klezmer supergroup," Brave Old World's North American
appearances have included New York's Lincoln Center, Washington's Wolf
Trap Foundation for the Performing Arts and National Geographic Society,
the Philadelphia Folk Festival, the Winnipeg Folk Festival, Indiana
University, and numerous other arts centers, universities, and festivals
throught the U.S and Canada. Featured regularly on TV and radio here and
abroad, the ensemble has been the focus of news segments on National
Public Radio's "All Things Considered," and CNN,  and is heard in Fiddler
on the Hoof, the Klezmer music documentary in the BBC-TV series Rhythms
of the World.

Martin Deutsch is the owner and proprietor of Martin L. Deutsch
Multilingual Software. He is the design consultant of The Yiddish
Forward, designs Yiddish fonts and is a consultant ot software producers.
He is also the father of an unbelievably large Yiddish speaking family.

Shulamis Dion is a New York based Ethno-musicologist, and teacher of
Yiddish, who has researched and published numerous articles and reviews
on the Klezmer music revival and Yiddish song. She holds an M.A. in Ethno
Musicology from Brown University and has pursued post-graduate study in
Ethnography and Yiddish language and literature at Columbia University
and the Max Weinreich Center of the YIVO Institute for Yiddish studies.

Eve Goodman is a graduate of The Workmen's Circle Mid-Town Shule and is
currently the youngest teacher in The Workmen's Circle Shule movement.

Naomi Hirsch, mezzo-soprano, has concertized throughout North America,
Israel and Germany. She is the featured soloist at the 1995 Workmen's
Circle Third Seder. An Invested Cantor, she is featured on the Wergo
label cd,  "Patterns of Jewish life" . A four time Klezkamper and a
graduate of the Uriel Weinreich Summer Program.

Miriam Hoffman is a journalist and feature writer for the Jewish Forward.
Full time lecturer in Yiddish and Yiddish literature at Columbia
University. Playwright - "A Rendezvous with God," "Songs of Paradise" and
"Hold the Wedding" (in collaboration with Rena Borow). The latest play -
"Mr. Singer and His Demon's"  will be staged in the Fall of 1995.

Ellie Kellman has been teaching Yiddish language and literature to adults
since 1987.  Now on the faculties of the University of Toronto and the
YIVO-Columbia Weinreich Summer Program, she has a special interest in
training new teachers of Yiddish.

Noyekh Miller is a sociologist, now retired, whose most recent stint was
at Trinity College. He lives in Brookline, Mass.

Binyumin "Ben" Schaechter is a composer of musicals, and of cabaret and
revue songs. Singers that have performed Ben's songs include Andrea
Marcovicci, Tovah Feldshuh and Nancy Dussalut. Revues with Ben's music
include "That's Life", "Pets" and "Too Jewish", for which he is also the
on-stage musical director/pianist and occasional singer and actor.

Dr. Mordkhe Schaechter was born in Cernauti, Rumania. Senior lecturer in
Yiddish studies emeritus, Columbia University. Editor of the journals
"Afn Shvel" and "Yiddisher Shprakh." Author of several books and studies
about Yiddish and executive director of the League for Yiddish.

Reyzl Kalifowicz-Waletsky has been active in the Yiddish community for
many years both personally and professionally. She is now the coordinator
of the Yi ddish Outreach Program at the Workmen's Circle and before she
was the Executive Director of the Congress for Jewish Culture. She has an
M.A. from Columbia University in Yiddish Language and Folklore and has
taught Yiddish at colleges and in adult-ed programs since 1971. A native
Yiddish-speaker and an ardent Yiddishist, she leads a Yiddish-speaking
home-life with her husband and children. Reyzl has been active in the
Yiddish community for many years both personally and professionally.

Jeff Warschauer (guitar, mandolin, tenor banjo, vocals) has played and
taught throughout the United States, in  Western Europe, Poland, the
former Soviet Union, Australia and New Zealand, and for the U.S.O. in
Greenland. He is a member of  the Klezmer Conservatory Band, has
performed with the Bolshoi Ballet, and has been Composer, Music Director
and/or featured instrumentalist for numerous theatrical productions,
recordings, and film soundtracks. In addition, he performs extensively in
duo and trio combinations with Dutch Yiddish singer Shura Lipovsky, and
New York pianist Zalmen Mlotek. In 1986 hewon the Amalgamated Bank Prize
for Yiddish Studies at the Oxford University Summer Programme, and he was
awarded a 1990 Massachusetts Artists Fellowship for his Klezmer mandolin
and solo guitar work. A graduate of the New England Conservatory of
Music, Jeff is on the faculty of the Longy School of Music and the YIVO
Yiddish Folk Arts Institute.

Sheva Zucker is author of the newly published text book "Yiddish: An
Introduction to the Language, Literature & Culture. Sheva has taught
Yiddish and Jewish literature at Columbia University, Russian State
Humanities University, Bar Ilan, Duke University and the University of
Manitoba. She has the only Yiddish speaking children in Durham, North
Carolina.


ACCOMMODATIONS & MEALS

Kosher gourmet dairy, fish cuisine and a traditional Erev Shabbes meal
will be served. Circle Lodge is a beautiful, modern resort in Dutchess
County, NY. Guests can take advantage of the Olympic-sized pool, lake,
tennis, track, volleyball and more.

The following accommodations are available:

PRIVATE ROOMS - air-conditioned with TV and private bath. Double
occupancy only. WC Members $190 Non-members $240

SEMI-PRIVATE with one double bed and shared bath. WC Members $130
Non-members $180

KINDER RING* dormitory style rooms with shared bath. WC Members $80
Non-members $130

*Currently registered college students under 25 years of age $85.00.
**After May1, 1995 add an additional $20.00 to all reservation fees. ***
If you join the Workmen's Circle Branch 105 when registering, the $50
member/nonmember differential will be credited toward your Workmen's
Circle membership. Add an additional $27.00 to the non-member price.

Please complete and return your reservation to: MAMELOSHN 95, Workmen's
Circle, 45 East 33rd Street, New NY 10016.

Name_________________________________________

Address_________________________________________

City_______________________  State__________       Zip___________

Daytime phone number:___________________

Workmen's Circle Branch #________________

Children?   yes_______  Name(s)________________________________

Age(s)_________      Crib?________

MAKE CHECKS PAYABLE TO Workmen's Circle Branch 105.

For more information, call 212-889-6800 ext.284 or outside NY 800-922-2558
ext.284  or E-mail Stdowling@Aol.com  or  Roland.Millman@Weiser.com

Stephen Dowling

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 4.361


Mendele has 2 rules:

	1. Provide a meaningful Subject: line
	2. Sign your article (full name please)

A Table of Contents is now available via anonymous ftp, along with weekly
updates.

Anonymous ftp archives available on:
          ftp.mendele.trincoll.edu
          in the directory pub/mendele/files

Archives available via gopher on:
        gopher.cic.net

Send articles to:
        mendele@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

Send change-of-status messages to:
        listserv@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

        a. For a temporary stop: set mendele nomail
        b. To resume delivery: set mendele mail
        c. To subscribe: sub mendele first_name last_name
        d. To unsubscribe kholile: unsub mendele

Other business:
        nmiller@mail.trincoll.edu



