
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 6.031
July 11, 1996

1) Oprikhtn goles (Eliyahu Juni)
2) Flogging a dead horse? (Zachary Baker)
3) Jonathan Rosen's article (Leah Zazulyer)
4) Birobidzhan (Zachary Baker)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 11 Jul 1996 04:13:11 -0400
From: e.juni@utoronto.ca
Subject: Urrekhtn gules

I have a question about the above phrase, but it requires a bit of a
hakdume, with background info to follow.

A few days ago, as I about to leave home for school, my grandfather
noticed that I was carrying a schoolbag over my shoulder, and asked,
b'deyrekh m'litse, "vus, gayst urrekhtn gules?"  I wasn't sure I had
heard him correctly, and asked him to repeat, which he did;  he then
explained that when tsadikim would go into exile, they used to call it
"urrekhtn gules".

"Gules" was a common practice in Eastern Europe for at least a few
centuries:  a tsadik would undertake a personal exile, to help fulfill
or atone for the communal exile of Israel and hasten the redemption.
For a second, I had thought that he said "farrekhtn gules", and would
have taken him to mean "What, are you off to fix the exile?"  I've never
heard the word "urrekhtn"  before.  Is it an everyday Yiddish word?
What does it mean?  (How is its meaning related to the meaning of
"farrekhtn"?) Is it idiomatically specific to this type of "fixing" the
world (see below)?  Is "urrekhtn-gules" a compound noun, a "fixing-exile"
(in which case the question was "What, are you leaving on a
fixing-exile?") Or maybe is it a different sort of fixing, fixing the
self (see further below), in which case an "urrekhtn-gules" is an exile
for personal atonement?

(Since tsadikim on gules travelled far and wide, mostly by foot, and
lived in poverty, they didn't carry much;  my guess is that the image of
the foot-traveller with a stick and a pack slung over one shoulder,
which in contemporary culture is associated with the hobo, was, for the
Eastern European Jew, associated with the wandering tsadik.  The last
figure outside the khsidishe world who I know is reputed to have gone on
gules is the Noyde Biyhude.  A lot of early khsidishe rebbes did it, but
I think the practice had completely disappeared by the end of the last
century, well before my grandfather was born, so he must know it as
folklore, not first-hand.)

(Re fixing:  In kabbalistic and mystical terminology, mitsves and
atonement are part of a larger framework of "fixing the world", setting
right that which was ruined/lowered/defiled by earlier misdeeds, and/or
perfecting that which is bad in the very nature of the world.  There's a
hook for this in the second half of Oleynu, and it has been used as a
starting point for the popular term/concept "tikkun", cf. the magazine.)

[More prutim on gules:  Tsadikim often went on gules for long periods,
and sometimes reinforced their decision by swearing not to set foot in
their hometown for x number of years.  Gules was sometimes prescribed to
penitents as a way to do penance for their misdeeds.  Some tsadikim did
it under pseudonym, as an exercise in humility, or to live the life of
the poorfolk, or so that no one would bother them or ask their advice.
Inviting a wanderer into one's home, besides being charitable and
therefore "the right thing to do", may have had held out the prospect of
an interesting surprise, in the form of an illustrious pauper, a famous
tsadik from far away--if only the balebos could get him to tell his
name. It wouldn't surprise me if the phenomenon--which certainly
existed--was hyped widely so as to tempt balebatim to invite wandering
beggars home, and to keep them long enough for a decent meal.  Cf.
Hershele Ostrepolyer and the epidemic in Brod--"ven Hershele est. . ."]

Eliyahu Juni

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 11 Jul 1996 11:10:50 -0500 (EST)
From: yivo1@metgate.metro.org
Subject: Flogging a dead horse?

This past Sunday [7/7/96] The New York Times Magazine had a article by
Jonathan Rosen, "A Dead Language, Yiddish Lives; And So Does the Fight
over Why." Surprisingly, none of our Mendelyaner has commented on the
article to date.  Rather than comment (editorially, that is), I wish
simply to bring this article to subscribers' attention.  The author, who
is associate editor the The [English] Forward, describes the
"reconstitut[ion of Yiddish] in multicultural America," as what "seems
part of a larger phenomenon that might be called the re-diasporization
of American Jews."

He points to such developments as Yiddish courses on college campuses,
the National Yiddish Book Center's building campaign, the identification
of "a surprising number of young gay Jews" with Yiddish, the continued
daily use of Yiddish among Hasidism (Rosen specifically mentions Satmar
Hasidim in Williamsburgh), and "the debate over what the language
means."  (He mentions Ruth Wisse's recent article in The New Republic in
that connection.)  "Realistically," Rosen concludes, "American Jews
aren't reacquiring Yiddish so much as they are adding an accent to
English -- an intellectual, emotional, perhaps even a religious
inflection.  The more comfortable Jews feel in America, the more open
they are to reclaiming a culture of exile.  This is the paradox of the
American diaspora:  the wish to feel different *and* and home.  Yiddish,
with all its complex, contradictory associations, is the language of
that desire."

All right; I will make one editorial observation:  I think that Rosen
takes too narrow a view of his subject.  However one might characterize
the "Yiddish phenomenon," it is hardly restricted to America -- and not
even to the Diaspora.  Our Israeli Mendelyaner can certainly attest to
the latter point.  In that connection, I have just read a fascinating
interview with Rachel Ertel in the latest issue of the journal Shofar
(vol. 14, no. 3, Spring 1996).  Prof. Ertel teaches in the Department of
Jewish-American Studies at the University of Paris VII, where she has
established a center for Yiddish studies as well.  She also edits a
series, Domaine yiddish, which publishes important works of modern
Yiddish literature in French translation (concentrating on modernist
writers, including Dovid Bergelson, Lamed Shapiro, and Moishe Kulbak).
The interview was conducted by Jean Baumgarten, a notable specialist on
Yiddish in his own right (author of Introduction a la litterature
yiddish ancienne), in a special issue of Shofar which bears the heading
"Jewish Studies in France" (the issue is edited by Alan Astro).

The interview, which is quite extensive, deals with the status of
Yiddish in France, primarily since the mass immigration of Eastern
European Jews began in the 1880s, and above all during the last two or
three decades. Prof. Ertel describes some of the notable Yiddishist
institutions in Paris -- among them the Bibliotheque Medem, which is
described at greater length in a separate article (written by Gilles
Rozier, director of the library) in the same issue.  The interview lends
a useful comparative perspective to Jonathan Rosen's New York Times
Magazine piece.  The pivotal role of the events of 1968 in the French
Jewish intellectual revival is emphasized by Prof. Ertel, and that
revival led a number of younger French Jews to study Yiddish.  (This
summer, Prof.  Ertel's university, is for the first time sponsoring an
intensive Yiddish summer course.)  Like Ruth Wisse, Rachel Ertel sees
the dissemination of Yiddish literature in translation and the academic
study of Yiddish as the essential vehicles for the preservation of the
language and its culture.  As she notes, at the conclusion of the
interview:

"No people can recover from a genocide.  To speak Yiddish now means
something entirely different from what it did in the pre-war world.  Of
course, you can raise the objection that in countries spared by the
genocide, such as the U.S., Yiddish was also in decline.  Linguistic
assimilation is at work in all democracies.  In open societies, minority
languages are threatened and weakened.  Nonetheless, the disappearance
of Yiddish is something particular.  The extermination of the Jewish
people in Eastern Europe was the final blow, after which Yiddish could
never regain its strength.  Let us suppose that some fringes of the
ultra-orthodox community emancipate themselves from ultra-orthodoxy.
Then the Yiddish language could re-occupy its place withing a
pluralistic society.  In that marginal space, there could, perhaps, be
born a new Yiddish culture of hitherto-unknown form, linked to a new
literature, political vision and world-view, yet bound up with the
thousand-year-old Yiddish past.  For other Jews, for Westernized Jews in
sum, Yiddish culture will survive through other languages and will
assume forms that cannot be foreseen."  (p. 137)

Zachary Baker

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 11 Jul 1996 10:08:13 -0400 (EDT)
From: watson@uhura.cc.rochester.edu
Subject: Jonathan Rosen's article

My own reaction to the article on Yiddish last Sunday in the NYT was
distress.  I thought that either the author wrote an unbalanced piece,
with many of the key elements which were not woven into a whole cloth,
OR the piece was badly edited and chopped.  Or both.  I thought of
immediately writing a letter to the editor to "balance" the exposition.
Today I wonder if others, even more au courant than I about the state of
affairs in Yiddish in today's world, might either have already done so
or should do so!

Can we have some discussion about that piece and how to most
effectively respond to it?

Leah Zazulyer

4)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 11 Jul 1996 11:26:53 -0500 (EST)
From: yivo1@metgate.metro.org
Subject: Birobidzhan

Today's New York Times (July 11, 1996) -- that fount of information on
all things Jewish -- has an article on Birobidzhan by James Brooke,
entitled "A Promised Land in Siberia?  Well, Thanks, but..."  The
article occupies a prominent place on page 4 of the news section, under
the heading "Birobidzhan Journal."  Brooke briefly summarizes the Jewish
Autonomous Region's history, leading up to a description of the mass
emigration of Jews that has taken place since 1990 and the uneasy
reaction of local authorities (some of them Jews) with Jewish
emigration. Among those interviewed for the article is Lena Belyayeva,
whom he describes as "one of two Yiddish teachers here."  She is quoted
as saying that officials in the city of Birobidzhan "are afraid that if
all the Jews go, there will be no need for a Jewish Autonomous Region.
Without that status, they will lose special subsidies from the federal
budget."  The drastic decline of the Russian economy (Birobidzhan's
"industrial and agricultural production [have] fall[en] by half since
1990") is pointed to as the main reason for the current wave of
emigration.

Zachary Baker

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 6.031

Mendele has 2 rules:

	1. Provide a meaningful Subject: line
	2. Sign your article (full name please)

Send articles to:
    mendele@yalevm.cis.yale.edu

Send change-of-status messages to:
    listserv@yalevm.cis.yale.edu

        a. For a temporary stop: set mendele nomail
        b. To resume delivery: set mendele mail
        c. To subscribe: sub mendele first_name last_name
        d. To unsubscribe kholile: unsub mendele

Other business:
    nmiller@mail.trincoll.edu

              ****Getting back issues****

1. Anonymous ftp archives are available.

ftp ftp.mendele.trincoll.edu
    in the directory pub/mendele/files

    A table of contents is also available, along with weekly updates.

2. Mendele archives can also be reached as follows:

via WWW:
    http://sunsite.unc.edu/yiddish/mewais.html

via gopher:
    gopher://sunsite.unc.edu/11/../.pub/academic/languages/yiddish/mendele

via ftp:
    ftp://sunsite.unc.edu/pub/academic/languages/yiddish/mendele



