
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 4.224
December 8, 1994

1) A Reply to my Critics (Zellig Bach)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 8 Dec 1994 10:42:14 -0500
From: zellig@aol.com
Subject: Rejoinder: A Reply to my Critics

I waited several weeks until all reactions to my Review Proposal were
published in Mendele so that I could write my rejoinder all at once. (May
I now have the floor, please, and the microphone? Thanks!)

I should probably have preceded my communication with the following
statement:

. . . . . . . . . . . . .  __________________________________
                        Warning:  Impatient and injudicious reading
                        may lead to miscomprehension and to a
                        jumping to illogical and  unwarranted
                        conclusions.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . __________________________________

1.  No Censorship was Proposed or Implied

As co-editor of the daily Yiddish newspaper _Folksblat_ in Kovne
(Lithuania), in the early and middle 1930's, I learned first hand the
meaning of censorship.  We, as well as other-language newspapers, were
required by the censors, often minutes before going to press, to delete
entire sections -- editorials, opinion pieces, feuilletons -- deemed by
them critical of the regime.

During one editorial conference, I remember, the chief editor jocularly
suggested to print the paper with all the white spaces where the censors
did their excisions, since this, in and of itself, would constitute a loud
and powerful protest against the government's policies.    (One
newspaper, indeed, did exactly that, possibly as a dare, but the
authorities promptly confiscated the entire issue.)

So don't talk to me about censorship!  Attributing to me the notion of
trying to introduce some kind of censorship in Mendele is blatantly
absurd, if not bizarre.  It misses me by a mile, and then some!

And, of course, there was never even a suggestion of gate-keepers!  We
have, got tsu danken, Noyekhn, and his gentle and  generous
gate-keepership is good enough for me!  To have  gate-keepers at the
Mendele doors, like burly keepers at the entrance of disco night clubs
to decide who should enter and who left out, is so far from my thinking
that I simply lack the words to characterize such nonsense.

2.  Proposal Solely Based on Freedom of Choice

If my critics would have read my proposal not in haste, and were not so
ready to react reflexively, they might have seen the voluntary character
of the proposal.

In my posting I clearly stated:  "Perhaps Mendele itself should make such
help available.  Perhaps the Mendele moderator should ask _permission_
(emphasis added) to have [Yiddish] texts put into acceptable shape."

Note the gently twice-stated "perhaps," and that permission to change
would have been sought, NOT imposed.  In my follow-up note it is even
more explicit:  "The author of a communication who _wishes_ (emphasis
added) his or her Yiddish text reviewed prior to publication starts the
message with a double R, for Review Requested....  This will flag the
author's wish and _permission_ (emphasis added again) to proceed in such
a fashion."  It was further stated that the flag [RR] would promptly be
deleted for the sake of confidentiality.

3.  My Position:  Always INclusionary

Were my critics endowed with a modicum of recall, they might have
remembered what I wrote not so long ago in Mendele in my essay on
"Romanization and Beyond:  Oyb Nit Nokh Hekher"  (4.141) where I stated
my steadfast position for an INclusionary policy.  I wrote (p. 3) :  "It
was never, never my intention to exclude anyone... My purpose was by all
means to strengthen Mendele and in no way to alienate anyone from our
mishpokhe.  It was and is my wish and hope to enlarge Mendele, not, khas
vekholile, to shrink it."  And again (p. 4, there): "Mendele's open door
policy shall and will continue. All are welcome!"

And in my recent proposal I practically restated the same position:
 "Introductions by new members are extremely important, and should by all
 means be welcomed and embraced."

I continue to hold firmly and unenqivocally to the same beliefs, and it
is, therefore, strange to find myself accused of somehow plotting an
exclusionary attitude with regards to Mendele.

As we say during the seyder ceremony, "kol dikhfin" -- all those hungry
for a Yiddish word, please join our festive gatherings.

4.  No Reason To Fear Homogenization

In case somebody feared that my proposal might lead to a one-dimensional
homogenization of the spelling and style in Mendele, or -- to coin a term
-- a YIVO'ization of our postings, this, too, was totally unfounded.

As I stated on a previous occasion, Mendele is no enemy to dialects. And
although I speak an ekhtn litvishn Yiddish , I gave several examples of
another dialect (A git harts, a sheyner punem).  I further stated that
dialects "add music and color to our language."

The very fact that our highly esteemed colleague Dr. Mikhl Herzog,
revered by many for his colossal work as the principal "cartographer" of
the map of Yiddish dialects, promptly and voluntarily joined the proposed
"minyen," was an assurance that the colorfulness of expressions,
dialectal or otherwise, would be preserved.

5.  The Other Meaning of Minyen

I am a secular Jew in all respects, and it occurred to me that the choice
of the term "minyen" in my proposal may have carried, unconsciously,
meanings other than just the numerical number of ten and certainly not
the exlusionary aspects of male only participants.

Joining a minyen in this new,  secular sense  means to me that it has a
special purpose.  It is like joining a learning khavruse that has a
focused and well defined function.

In this particular case it would be a _mitsve_, a good deed, something
helpful, something right for Yiddish.

Many Mendele members express in their Introductions a wish to learn more
about Yiddish, indeed to _learn_ Yiddish, and I am positive that they
would find proper spelling and correct syntactical sentences quite
beneficial.

And I firmly believe that a subscriber daring enough, so to speak, to
"flag" his posting with a double [RR], for Review Requested, would be
happy to see the changes, and in the process find it helpful.

6.  Two Opposite Yardsticks

I read recently the following curious item:  The National Odd Shoe
Exchange has 19,000 members on its E-Mail list and plays matchmaker to
Americans who wear different sized shoes.  Say your left foot is size six
and your right a size eight.  The Exchange combs its database for
potential shoemates and provides a list of phone numbers, so that the
parties can coordinate their purchases.

It occurred to me that my critics "wear" two different yardsticks:  One
for themselves when they write, for instance, a faultless English.  And a
totally different yardsick of _laissez-faire_ when it comes to Yiddish,
an attitude of "hefker petrishke," of "anything goes," overlooking
crippled words and mangled sentences, a blatant insult to the language
they profess to love.

7.  Analysis of Some Other Criticisms

One critic gives me the unsolicited advice to "skip" those messages
written in "attempted" Yiddish.  Sorry, no go!  I'm a habitual reader (at
breakfast I even lurk unto the backs of cereal boxes.  (Interesting
reading matter:  the percentages of RDA, the U.S. Required Daily
Allowances of vitamins.). Besides, the moment you start reading a
communication and encounter that the Yiddish is sorrowfully limping, it's
too late.

Not for me an attitude of "benign neglect," and certainly not one of cool
detachment!

Another critic states:  "The purpose of language should be communication,
not gate-keeping."  But these are totally two different things!   My
position about the non-proposed gate-keeping was already stated above.
And there is no quarrel whatsoever what the purpose of language is.  No
dispute here.

But what is one to do when this very purpose is miscarried, when a
statement made, and then _published_ in a bruised and tsekalyetshetn
(mutilated) Yiddish to the point where meaning is lost and needs, in
turn, to be translated into a clear Yiddish to serve the intended
purpose?

Another criticism: "Just as we (hopefully) do not correct our friends'
grammar and pronunciation in the course of conversation, we should not
impose ourselves as teachers in the course of an electronically
transmitted written conversation."

I beg your pardon!  An E-mail mesage that is being published and
disseminated to hundreds and hundreds of subscribers is not a one-to-one,
person-to-person private conversation, and it therefore behooves the
sender to write it in a generally accepted and correct manner, or-- if
and when necessary -- to tag it with an [RR] for permission to review the
Yiddish.

8.  Positive Reactions by Cool-Headed Readers.

I received a number of E-mail messages from Mendelyaners,  taking issue
with my critics, and supporting wholeheartedly my review proposal.

David Gasser sent me a lengthy, interesting essay of his perception of
Yiddish, and I quote here, with permission, one passage germane to this
rejoinder:

"I find it ironic that your comments have drawn such ire from people
comparing your efforts to Czarist edicts.  Are they not demonstrating the
same degree of intolerance that they accuse you of?"

My sincerest thanks to all those who wrote me privately but most
especially to Arn Abramson, Louis Fridhandler, Miriam Halkin, and Yude
Rozof who expressed in Mendele their opinions about the review proposal,
seeing clearly its intent, spirit of good will, and -- yes -- merit for
learners, the overall purpose being the love of and the defense of
Yiddish.

Miriam Halkin, in her two postings, restated my points in clear,
unambiguous, definitive terms.  She wrote:  "...As I understood it, this
would be a service available to those who want it and not one imposed on
those who don't....  Zellig Bach's kind offer would ensure the
reliability of Mendele as a vehicle for learning....  It is just gross
errors of grammar and syntax that I'd like [to see] eliminated, if
possible, and I think that's what [his] proposal aimed to do, no more"
(4.204,3 and 4.209,1).

9.  Volunteer Reviewers

We have now four members who volunteered to do some review work: Mikhl
Herzog, mentioned above, Dvosye Bilik, Louis Fridhandler, and myself.
These volunteers would serve at Noyekh's pleasure who will, at his
discretion, distribute postings flagged with an [RR].

Dr. Jeff Zucker, in his recent Introduction (4.211,1), asked for help
with his Yiddish exercises from U. Weinreich's _College Yiddish_.  As a
faithful servant of Yiddish, I promptly E-mailed him my offer of help.

Zellig Bach

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 4.224

Mendele has 2 rules:

	1. Provide a meaningful Subject: line
	2. Sign your article (full name please)

A Table of Contents is now available via anonymous ftp, along with weekly
updates.

Anonymous ftp archives available on:
          ftp.mendele.trincoll.edu
          in the directory pub/mendele/files

Archives available via gopher on:
        gopher.cic.net

Send articles to:
        mendele@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

Send change-of-status messages to:
        listserv@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

        a. For a temporary stop: set mendele nomail
        b. To resume delivery: set mendele mail
        c. To subscribe: sub mendele first_name last_name
        d. To unsubscribe kholile: unsub mendele

Other business:
        nmiller@mail.trincoll.edu



