
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 3.046
June 24, 1993


1) Psevdonimen bay yidn (David Neal Miller)
2) Philologus (Bob Werman)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu Jun 24 09:49:39 1993
From: David Neal Miller <dnmiller@magnus.acs.ohio-state.edu>
Subject: Psevdonimen bay yidn

I enjoy reading Ellen Prince's pointed and precise postings, but she
is, atypically, off the mark when she characerizes the use of
pseudonyms as "a custom usually reserved for advice-to-the-lovelorn
columnists" (Mendele 3.040).

The use of pseudonyms is, in fact, a Yiddish (also Hebrew)
custom--or, rather, strategy--of long and honorable standing: we
remember that only one of the classical triumverate (Y.-L. Perets)
customarily signed his works with an orthonym. This practice lasted
well into the present century. Consider, say, the core members of
the _yunge_: Mani-Leyb [Brahinski], H. Leyvik [Leyvik Halper], Anna
Margolin [Roze Lebensboym], Zishe Landoy [orthonym], and Ruvn
Ayzland [orthonym]; this distribution of pseudonyms to orthonyms is
(impressionistically: I've not done any formal tabulation) typical.
Indeed, the 1978 Nobel laureate in literature published a single
work--a forgettable fee-for-service translation from the
German--under his orthonym, but literally thousands of works under
one of several pseudonyms (Yitskhok Bashevis, Yitskhok Varshavski,
D. Segal).

Nor has the use of pseudonyms been limited to belletrists. From
Kritikus [Shimen Dubnov] writing in _Voskhod_ to A. Forsher [Yosl
and Khane Mlotek] writing in the _Forverts_, works of scholarship
and haute vulgarisation have appeared pseudonymously.

Two axes along which pseudonyms can relevantly (to our collective
discussion of the Wexler affair) be plotted are those of the
"transparency" of the pseudonym--that is, the extent to which the
pseudonymous author's real-world identity is known to his or her
readership--and the degree to which the pseunonym moves beyond mere
signature toward autonymous psuedonymous persona. I'll touch on each
in turn.

There is marked diversity in the extent to which the Yiddish
readership has been privy to the identity of the authors of
pseudonymously attributed works. Some pseudonyms are, indeed, open:
who did not know--was not _supposed_ to know--that Yitskhok Zinger
stood behind the pseudonym Yitskhok Bashevis? (The problem with IBS
is rather the reverse: one forgets that Bashevis is a pseudonym.) By
contrast, the identity of Yitskhok Varshavski was not widely known
until the constraints of (American!) copyright compelled an
orthonymic signature to the English-language translations of
Varshavski's works. Withal, East Broadway was a world of the open
secret, and few readers who cared to know could not learn the secret
of Varshavski's historical authorship (compare the secret of A.
Forsher's identity before it, too, was revealed to the _Forverts_
readership). Finally, very, very few people indeed knew the identity
of D. Segal. Singer kept it guarded for a number of reasons not
relevant to the matter at hand; and the _Forverts_ kept it guarded
lest the readership learn how very much of the editorial content was
written by a single hand. I thought to--and did--astound my audience
at a public lecture in the late seventies by revealing D. Segal's
identity, only to learn that Leonard Prager had earlier revealed it
(in the EJ, no less). [How, as an aside to Professor Prager, did you
ever come by this closely-guarded information?] Singer continued to
deny that he was Segal well into the 1980s.

A second relevant axis along which to plot pseudonyms among Yiddish
authors is the extent to which pseudonymous signatures become
fictive personas distinct from those of their historical authors.
The scholarly literature considers in detail the Sholem-Aleykhem
persona, radically at odds with the historical Sh. Rabinovitsh; in
an article on (non)closure in SA, I discuss how the author and his
persona take opposing, incommensurable positions on the need for
happy endings. And, in a delightful (for those in the know) bit of
persona-play, Yitskhok Varshavski takes Farlag Matones to task in
the pages of the _Forverts_ for having stiffed his colleague
Yitskhok Bashevis of his royalties, the latter being too timid to
assert his claim in an open forum. Nor, again, is this ploy the
exclusive provenance of belletrists: the russophone Kritikus was
more civil and less emotionally engaged than the yiddophone
Dubnov--better the readership not know, as it did not for a certain
time, that Kritikus and Dubnov were, extratextually, the same
person.

_Within the context of Yiddish literary and scholarly practice_,
then, there is nothing the least bit unseemly about Philologus
writing unter an opaque pseudonym, nor should one necessarily regard
the scant autobiographical data as normative. I would not be
surprised, and certainly not offended, to learn that Philologus made
her home in, say, the United States--though most likely not in
Philadelphia.

David Neal Miller
miller.3@osu.edu

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu Jun 24 09:19:55 1993
From: RWERMAN%HUJIVMS.bitnet@YaleVM.YCC.Yale.Edu
Subject:  Philologus, detective [defective? in Upper Sorban] work.

Z. Baker may have something reasonable in his speculations as to the
identity of Adon or is it Herr Philologus?

One of my spies tells me that Hillel Halkin, a translator to English
of both Hebrew and Yiddish, reads Mendele [I do not remember seeing
him post anything].  Could the shammas confirm?

Hillel Halkin is not obviously subscribed to Mendele, BUT there are
4 "concealed" subscribers.  Who can they be?

On the other hand, he need not be subscribed; he could read other
people's mail.  His sister, Mimi, for example, is one of Mendele's
readers.

Respectfully submitted.

Robert Werman, native speaker of pre-12th century Lower Sorban.

aka

__Bob Werman

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 3.046

