
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 5.164
November 9, 1995

1) Dialects, standards, and khsidim (Eliyahu Juni)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 29 Oct 1995 20:34:11 -0500
From: ao107@freenet.carleton.ca
Subject: Dialects, standards, and khsidim--bove basre (toysefte)

Recently, a humorous piece, devised as an interview with Colin Powell,
was published in Mendele.  In the buildup, the author refused a Thursday
appointment, because it fell on Yom Kippur, and rescheduled for the
following Monday.  How many Mendelyaner noticed that Monday was yontev,
the first day of Sukes?  I surmise that the author threw in the Yom
Kippur angle to add a bit of Yidishe ta'am (that's Jewish flavour, cf.
"Yiddishkayt").  But for anyone who has a giste or a g'fil for Yidishe
ta'am, it can't work if you don't get the details straight.  You can't
divorce Yiddish from Yiddishkayt, and it's almost impossible to know
Yiddishkayt well without living in it.


There are many other examples.  (I've been collecting a selection, so I
guess I'll dump them all on you at once.)  In vol. 5.057, Reb Noyekh
wrote "as Tevye would say, 'kulonu khakhomim'."  How many Mendelyaner
noticed that the phrase comes from the hagode?  Or the irony in asserting
something which, in avodim hoyinu, is a utopian goal?  And how many
notice the double entendre in the name "Tevye der milkhiger", for that
matter?


There was a Yiddish festival in Toronto this summer, called Ashkenaz.  At
the parts I was able to go to (most of it was on Shabbes), I felt
strangely out of place.  And, besides the Shabbes angle, there were a
couple of things that convinced me that I was, indeed, not in the same
world of Yiddish.

At one of the musical events, there was one musician whose Yiddish was
unusually well-articulated for a non-native speaker--he practically
didn't have an accent.  But when he sang some words in loshnkoydesh which
were part of a traditional khsidishe song, he mangled them so horribly,
s'hot g'risn oyf di oyeren.  I had never before heard someone with a good
Yiddish whose Hebrew pronunciation was so atrocious--bad Ivre, for me, is
the domain of the Jewishly uneducated and those beginning their Jewish
education, while good Yiddish, like good Hebrew, is in the domain of the
Jewishly well-educated, usually from an early age.

When this musician sang a Yiddish wedding song which I didn't know, about
going to greet the bride and groom, almost everyone in the room sang
along, and seemed to know the song very well.  Not even a minute later,
another participant sang "Ki b'simkho seytseyu," using the traditional
melody that (I had thought) every Jew knows in their bones, and which
many haymishe yidn sing after havdole.  The crowd seemed to be very moved
by the song (it really is beautiful), but not at all familiar with it.  I
really enjoyed the concert, but as I walked out it occurred to me that
maybe I hadn't heard the same thing as the people around me.


Last year, my uncle participated in a mock "shtetl wedding" organized (in
part?) by students and faculty of Yiddish at Columbia.  I was stuck in
the cold white north, but he recently showed me a video of the event.
Most of the participants and crowd seemed to be irreligious, and the
organizers spent a lot of time explaining rules, customs, symbols, and
attitudes.  Things which for me were poshet were treated as khidushim--
and the explanations weren't always accurate.  And it struck me, as I
watched it, that with all the effort that they put into making it
authentic--and they did a very good job--it still felt like it wasn't
quite right, that they didn't really get what that world was like, and
didn't even know it.  The small-town homeliness was there, but the
Yiddishkayt didn't shtim.  Not having lived in that world, I'm being
rather pretentious, but I got the feeling that even with their all-out
effort to capture the atmosphere of a shtetl, they hadn't quite been able
to capture the taste of a religious setting, let alone the particularly
sheltered, unrefined, ingenuous flavour of Yiddishkayt found in the
shtetl.


One of the sharpest contrasts between the two Yiddishes on Mendele has
been in the area of names:  Mendelyaner have often been puzzled by names,
and particular name combinations, which are common in the religious
community, sometimes for obvious historical or religious reasons.  And
even among those who are relatively well-versed in the names department,
there is plenty of confusion;  does anyone remember the protracted
discussion on Heshl, Hershl, Yoynosn, Nosn, Nisn and Nism?  (Those are
all different names, and I still maintain that any kheyderyingl could
tell you so.)


OK, enough already.  But before you decide I'm seeing things, please go
through this list of Yiddish words.  How many are you familiar with, what
do they mean, and how/when are they used (in Yiddish)?  And what are
their origins? (I tried to stick to YIVO transcription; most them are
pretty common, and the average Williamsburgh semi-native speaker should
know almost all of them.)

moremoreynu    asheryotsar          a yor un a mitvokh   magid
es-tog         ayertsvibl           klapn alkhet         beys'kise
purimtoyre     terkishe talis       b'naybay             yoysheyv
razh'volke     shrayim              esn kest             b'somimbiksl
khazerbokher   shal'shudestoyre     asheryotsarpapir     shev'brokhes
kupke          a gut kvitl          forshpil             shatnez
mashke         ts'risene bekishe    balt'keye            anash
nad'n          meyle                zikhroynelivrokhe    tilimyid
moley          mayimakhroynimvaser  aderabe              saginor
v'kheyn l'mar  vayitsaki            m'lavemalke          madokh


If you aren't bewildered, I'm betting either you were raised frim (and
probably still are), or you found out from one of us frimaks on Mendele,
or you are highly unusually well-versed in frime culture for someone who
isn't frim.


So now that I've said my piece, what will I do?  There's no way I'll give
up dialects and my altenative-universe Yiddish.  (Maybe the lot of you
should come aboard--the long-term prospects are a bit better on this side
of the fence ;-).  We may be talking apples and oranges, but I don't plan
to give up on Mendele--it's the best place around to khap a shmuz.

Eliyahu Juni

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 5.164

