
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 5.237
January 29, 1996

1) Badkhn und marshelik (Bernard Katz)
2) Bokser (Hershl Hartman)
3) Sholem Aleichem's rage (Louis Fridhandler)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 29 Jan 1996 03:00:36 -0500 (EST)
From: bkatz@uoguelph.ca
Subject: Badkhn und marshelik

I offer another small piece of information on these two words.  Gleaning
Stutchkoff's wonderful Oitzer fun der Yiddisher Shprakh, I found badkhn
indexed in two places: under poezieh (382) in the group starting with the word
poet, sub-group starting with raymer; and under zivg (563), group
makhutonimshaft, sub-group badkhn.  Marshelik is found in 563 in the very same
sub-group right after badkhn, and also under vitz-shpot (518), group
komedyant, sub-group badkhn!  In other words, this is another occurance of
badkhn not found in the index.  Other words in the sub-group under 382 are
gramen-zoger and gramen-flekhter; the next sub-group begins with improvizator,
but marshelik is not to be found here.  Under 518, badkhn and marshelik are
the only two in the sub-group; the next sub-group starts with komiker.  Under
563, badkn and marshelik are followed in the same sub-group by svidalnik and
serdalnik.  My own "reading" of how these two words are placed by Stutchkoff
leads me to conclude that they were used vitually interchangeably.  As for
Feffer's usage, I am impressed by David Goldman's analysis and explanation.

Bernard Katz
Guelph, Ontario

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 29 Jan 1996 13:16:00 -0500
From: hershl@aol.com
Subject: Bokser

Since khamishe oser (tu) b'shvat is almost upon us and since carob trees
literally line some streets in the San Fernando Valley, teachers at the
secular Sholem Sunday School had no difficulty in gathering pods to bring to
class today (Sunday).

"Bokser," I said. "No, kharuv," said a parent who grew up in Israel. Harkavy's
yidish-english-hebreyisher verterbukh confirmed the vast disparity in terms.

My query: fun vanen nemt zikh dos vort bokser? What is the origin of the
Yiddish word, "bokser" and why, if known, would a fruit from erets yisroyl not
bear its original Hebrew name? (Corollary query: would our California
Senator's family name come from the same source?)

Hershl Hartman

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 29 Jan 1996 14:13:02 -0500
From: lfridhan@aol.com
Subject: Sholem Aleichem's rage

Yiddish authors in Russia were able to create timeless gems despite dire
times.  Let's think about 1911 Russia, half way  between the abortive Russian
revolution of 1905 and the complete upheaval of 1917.  For the rampant
deterioration in conditions for ordinary Russian people, the shaky tsarist
regime strove to pin blame on scapegoats.  They chose their favorites, the
Jews.  Coincidentally, 1911 was also half way between the first volume of
Sholem Aleichem's Motl Peysi dem Khazns (1907) and the second volume (1916).
In 1911 he wrote (among other gems) Gitl Purishkevitsh,' a funny story of a
Jewish woman who dared to confront the anti-Semitism of Purishkevitsh right in
the Russian duma.

The smooth flow of Sholem Aleichem's writing, the lightness of touch, his
delight in the sounds and rhythms of the Yiddish language occupy the
foreground.  In our time that foreground may hide the treacherous background:
the vicious regime of Tsar Nikolai the second.  A look behind the foreground
may magnify our admiration for the achievements of Yiddish literature of that
time.  A glimpse of that background is afforded by a letter of Sholem Aleichem
to a Russian gentile writer and critic, Amfiteatrov.

Mendel Beilis, a Jew of Kiev, had been arrested and accused of ritual murder;
that is, murdering a boy to obtain Christian blood for matzohs.  Russian
authorities and the world knew Beilis was innocent.  Still, the
scapegoat-hunters persisted in framing Beilis.  Right wing propagandists
proclaimed that _all_ Jews stood accused of ritual murder.  Sholem Aleichem
hoped to prompt Alexander Amfiteatrov to join others (e.g. Maxim Gorki) in
collective protest against the vicious anti-Jewish slander spread by the Union
of Russian People and their bands of ruffians, The Black Hundreds.  The latter
were right wing goon squads generously financed by Tsar Nicholas II through
his membership in the Union of Russian People.  They had free rein to incite
hatred of Jews through pamphlets, posters, and newspapers.  Russian liberals
denounced these attacks.  The tsarist propagandists distorted the words of the
liberals, and right wingers used the word, "liberal," as an insult.

Amfiteatrov had expressed enthusiastic admiration for Sholem Aleichem's work
in Russian translation.  They corresponded and met together.  Here is a
translation from Sholem Aleichem's own Yiddish version of his Russian letter
to Amfiteatrov: An unfamiliar Sholem Aleichem voice appears: a stern, rageful,
impassioned voice aiming to whip up protest against injustice. [Dos
Sholem-Aleykhem Bukh, p. 237.]

To my dear colleague Alexander Amfiteatrov.

I'm glad to note that I was right about you.  As the true Christians you are,
you and your good friend Maxim Gorki are most deeply distressed by the
recklessly deceitful distortions about Jews advanced by factions who are
connected to you by close bonds of brotherhood.  But God forbid that I claim
that all Christians are bloodthirsty.  That would not be fitting for me as a
Jew.  If the situation were reversed, that is, if Jews accused Christians of
ritual murder, I would be utterly ashamed, even if those Jews were more evil
than Purishkevitch and Markov (notorious anti-Jewish agitators) combined.  It
doesn't follow, however, that you must be ashamed.  I would not demand that of
friends.

Your collective protest should be very worthwhile coming, as it does, from the
best Russians in this Fatherland which rules over us all, but does not deal
with us equally.  Most assuredly, this protest of yours is not needed to
refute the blood accusation.  This libel has already been discredited a
hundred times.  If ritual murders occur, it is not by the victims of pogroms,
but by those who perpetrate them.  By what name other than "ritual murder" can
we call the "noble" deeds of those who attacked Jews in pogroms at Kishinev
and elsewhere?  They threw children from a high building as though it were a
holy celebration.  They shouted "Hurrah!" as they sliced open the bellies of
pregnant women.  Is this not a ritual?  And what about the "magnificent"
speeches by Markov and his gang in the Duma, that "we won't tear open [the
envelopes of] your Jewish excuses, but the bellies of your women."  Is this
not a ritual? But then, this need not be the main point of your protest.  In
my opinion, your protest should expose the underlying aim of those who raise
the blood libel: in plain words, an all-Russian pogrom against the Jews, a
repetition of the unforgettable year of 1905.

If your declaration were to be heard by your colleagues in other lands, how
good that would be.  A global outcry might emerge.

Since all this is only my personal opinion , it may be superfluous, but I know
that you and your friend, Maxim Gorki, will give this the careful
consideration it merits.  I extend my hand to you both in a spirit of
brotherhood.

Sholem Aleichem.	Badenweiler, May 23, 1911.

[Amfiteatrov was the only one to publish his denunciation of the violence.
Badenweiler was a spa in Germany where Sholem Aleichem spent some summers to
continue recovery from tuberculosis.  In 1911, he also wrote a letter
expressing admiration of Tolstoi, but disappointment in Tolstoi's passive
silence in the face of injustice.  Next post.]

Louis Fridhandler

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 5.237

