
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 5.114
September 17, 1995

1) Yiddishnet is finally up (Reyzl Kalifowicz-Waletzky)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 15 Sep 1995 13:56:17 -0400
From: reyzl@aol.com
Subject: Yiddishnet is finally up

After so much delay with printers, getting proper formats of manual
files, formatting messes in transmitting files, etc., the Internet list
"YiddishNet" is finally up.  I have just written the welcome message for
new subscribers, and part of it is reproduced below.  This should give
everyone an idea of what YiddishNet about.

Sorry that I have no time to read Mendele anymore, shoyn opgeret fun
shraybn, but soon, soon I tell myself, I will get to my fat Mendele
archive and catch up on all the fun I have been missing this whole year.

Since I so rarely get to write to Mendele, let me take this opportunity
to inform you also that I am in the process of preparing a resource
catalogue for the field of Yiddish to be produced next year.  I already
have 330,000 bytes of data but this is only partial information of what
goes on in the world.  So please send me all information about your
activities, organizations, clubs, groups, publications, classes,
teachers, centers, recordings, etc. for Yiddishnet, "Global Yiddish"
bulletin as well as the resource catalogue. I am especially interested in
getting material from outside of the United States.  My preferred address
is reyzl@mcimail.com.

Also, to subscribe to "YiddishNet", send the following message "SUBSCRIBE
yiddishnet <your name>"   to the following address:

listserv@shamash.nysernet.org

Ksive vkhsime toyve to everyone
A gezunt, gliklekh yor alemen
( It's going to be another year of not sending out New Year's cards.)

*******

Welcome to Yiddishnet, an open, public, moderted announcement list
dedicated to the field of Yiddish language and culture.

What is Yiddishnet?

Yiddishnet primarily published "Global Yiddish", a quarterly bulletin
that covers literature, media, computers, language instruction material
and programs, e-mail, services, conferences, as well as performances,
meetings, events and activities sponsored by various groups and
organizations around the world.  Along with the quarterly bulletin, there
will also be periodic postings of upcoming Yiddish events around the
world that could not be included in "Global Yiddish".

Note:  My former internet list "Yiddish1" has been changed to YiddishNet
and the sponsoring organization is now Workmen's Circle. "Yiddish1" has
been eliminated.

"Global Yiddish" is also published quarterly in print by the Workmen's
Circle in a complete bilingual edition in an 11"X14" 12-page two-color
format.  The Yiddish version of the bulletin (6 pages), called
"Alveltlekh Yiddish", is published together with the English (6 pages).
Single issues are available upon request at no cost at this time.
YiddishNet will publish the English version of the bulletin ("Global
Yiddish") and will attempt to find the technical means in the next few
months to publish the Yiddish version ("Alveltlekh Yiddish") as well.
Once the technical aspects of this will be mastered, the software
necessary to receive and send Yiddish e-mail will also be available on
YiddishNet for simple downloading (for IBM's and Macs.)   I am also
working on placing YiddishNet on local BBS's for those without an
Internet address.  YiddishNet will be available on City People in New
York City (212-255-6656).  I welcome all help and suggestions with
finding other BBS's, wherever they may be.

The purpose of the electronic and print bulletin is to gather and
disseminate news and information about Yiddish language and culture in
America and internationally to both speakers and non-speakers of Yiddish.
One of the benefits of the newsletter will be to increase awareness of
how much takes place in Yiddish across generations and religious
affiliation all around the world.  This community of interest is
geographically diffuse and contact via internet can have a decisive
effect on the further growth and development of Yiddish cultural
activities.   We hope that this newsletter will serve as an informational
clearinghouse in a manner and breadth not available in any other single
publication.  This newsletter should be useful to all lovers of Yiddish,
whether the interest be of an ideological, popular or academic nature.
YiddishNet is not a discussion forum for Yiddish language and culture.
That's what the Mendele forum is about.  YiddishNet has a very specific
focus which complements Mendele. It is for news and announcements only.
Announcements will probably/hopefully be cross-posted on both lists by
myself and others.  YiddishNet  welcomes informative postings about
present and future programs, performances, meetings, events, activities,
publishing, and products.  Please let us hear of your latest news or
interesting finding from anywhere in the world which you feel may be
interesting to others with an interest in the field of Yiddish.  I will
attempt to post as much as possible and as often as possible.

Please e-mail your posting or comments at any of my four personal
addresses listed below.   Calling, mailing, or faxing is also possible,
but definitely not preferred since it does allow for easy, speedy
reposting.  See details below.

       reyzl@aol.com
       reyzl@mcimail.com
       5943838@mcimail.com
       wcfriends@aol.com
           (please begin your text message with "Attention Reyzl")

Workmen's Circle
45 East 33 Street
New York, N.Y.  10016
212-889-6800 x 208
Phone: 800-922-2558 x 208.
Fax: 212-532-7518

Reyzl Kalifowicz-Waletzky

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 5.114

