Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 1 no. 155
January 31, 1992
 
1) Ludic Yiddish, part 3 (Yude-Leyb Proger)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: January 31, 1992
From: Yude-Leyb Proger
Subject: Ludic Yiddish, part 3

                    Ludic Yiddish (Note Three)
 
             by Yude-Leyb Proger (Leonard Prager), Haifa
 
My thesis in "Ludic Yiddish (Note One)" was that as Yiddish
as an everyday language declines among non-ultra-Orthodox
Ashkenazim, its LUDIC uses are stressed at the expense of
others. My point in "Ludic Yiddish (Note Two)" was that
Yiddish functions in a wide range of registers and one
should not overemphasize its playful and ironic elements at
the expense of others.  In Note Three I would like to
illustrate some of the forms of vulgarization to which
Yiddish is commonly subjected.  But before I begin to do so
I want to acknowledge that much ludicization of Yiddish has
come and continues to come from within as distinct from
those whose aim is ridicule.
 
The Yiddish theater began in wine gardens and outdoor cafes
in Romania and to this day is tied to light music and
comedy (the typical Yiddish evening in Israel is devoted to
"humor un gezang"). Goldfadn molded romance, pathos and
popular history into delightful operettas with catchy,
singable tunes that often became folksongs.  Goldfadn
helped to educate a generation of Jews fresh from the
shtetl and in the throes of urbanization to the delights of
theater.  Jacob Gordin helped move the Yiddish theater from
melodrama and bombast to coherent problem plays where real
characters spoke a natural language.

The Yiddish theater rapidly developed into a forum for
serious art.  The lack of original plays led to the
dramatization of best-selling novels and translations from
world literature.  The crisis of the Yiddish theater was
internal as well as external. As the sophisticated theater
goers moved to the non-Yiddish theater, the simpler
audience was fed a continuous diet of light entertainment,
always a surer investment for an institution which depended
on the box office rather than organizational subsidies.  In
this potted one-paragraph synopsis of the history of the
more than century-old world Yiddish theater, I want only to
stress how demography, economics and sociology conspired to
make much of Yiddish public art mere light entertainment.
 
In America the borsht belt and its esthetic standards
exerted an immense influence.  An entire "Jewish-American"
repertoire of mangled and pseudo-Yiddish songs and jokes
were produced for a generation increasingly out of touch
with the sources of Yiddish creativity.  To their children,
inevitably, Yiddish came to mean mainly funny words with
which you spice your English.  By juxtaposing Yiddish and
"straight" Anglo-American elements one achieves a variety
of parodic and comic effects.

The musicologist, Mark Slobin, has (without making esthetic
or musical value judgements) used two such songs ("Midnight
Ride of Paul Revere" and "My Coney Ireland Weddding") to
illustrate code-switching and code-superimposition in
popular American music (see his "Code Switching and Code
Superimposition in Music," _Working Papers in
Sociolinguistics_ (Number 63), Austin, TX, July 1979).

Slobin describes the first song as follows (p. 8): "A
Yiddish comedy number of the late 1940s called 'The
Midnight Ride of Paul Revere' by the Barton Brothers, a
talented and now forgotten duo begins with a perfectly
standard recitation of the eponymous Longfellow poem,
accompanied by a trumpet-and-drum rendition of 'The Battle
Hymn of the Republic'.  The diction and dialect of the
reciter are straight American, slightly pompous. Suddenly,
this American reverie is broken by a brief silence and a
highly dramatic code switch to a Jewish dance band playing
a Yiddish tune, who accompany a second narrator.  He uses a
heavy Yiddish intonation and delivers a parody of the
American patriotic poem ("Paul Rabinowitz," etc.) in a
Yiddish full of English lexical intrusions.  A short
section of this pattern is followed by a break which
introduces the return of the Longfellow poem, American
style.  The two components of the performance are
alternated in unbroken succession until the entire
Longfellow poem has been recited."
 
Of the second example, Slobin writes (pp. 10-11):  "Here
confrontation between the Jews and the Irish is hinted at
in a song entitled 'My Coney Ireland Wedding' (sung by Leo
Fuchs).  Fuchs begins with an Irish melody, and describes
his wedding in a straight English mentioning, however,
Jewish items such as 'a small bar mitzvah hall'.  This is
followed by a comic listing of bizarre relatives who
interrupt the post-nuptial bliss. Here there is a mixed
Yiddish and English text, set to another Irish tune,
yielding a fairly complex case of superimposition of codes.
The musical plot is then considerably thickened by a quick
code switch to the band alone, playing a standard Yiddish
dance number before Fuchs returns for the second verse,
which repeats the whole process."
 
These Jewish-American artifacts are as worthy of study as
any other part of musical culture.  But my response to them
is not that of the detached scientist.  Because I hear them
with Yiddish ears, I don't find them amusing.  I feel
embarassed that a comic talent such as Fuchs was reduced to
singing such songs.  To me their parodic value is minimal
and they end up ludicizing Yiddish.  I have friends,
intelligent friends, who find such songs funny.  I find
most dialect humor offensive.  What is funny depends on who
is doing what to whom and where and when and how and why.
The guy who slips on the banana peel is never amused,
although almost everybody else is.
 
The ludicization of Yiddish in America (and to a far lesser
extent Britain and the Commonwealth countries)  is a subtle
process which works largely through the selection of a
small group of Yiddish-origin words which are felt to have
a special character, almost invariably comic or grotesque
to some degree.  Thus the 30 April 1979 issue of _The New
Yorker_ contains an advertizement for _Juggling for the
Complete Klutz_, a book described as "the single most
hilarious instruction book ever written. Packaged with 3
handsewn, easy-to-toss calico beanbags, it makes the
perfect gift for the household klutz (and everyone will
know who that is)" (p. 126). The publisher?  Why "Klutz
Enterprises" of course. The Jewish English word _klutz_
'clumsy person' is, of course, from Yiddish _kluts_ 'log;
clumsy person'. An article in the _Jerusalem Post Magazine_
about the tourism unit of the Jerusalem Police Department
(15 July 1988, p. 6) is entitled "Tourist tsouris," the
Yiddish _tsores_ (besides being a good rhyme for _tourist_)
being one of those common Yiddish-origin words in Jewish
English which are often used jocularly.  Examples of this
sort of thing can be collected in the hundreds.
 
The advertisement for Leo Rosten's _Hurray for Yiddish !_
(subtitled "A Book about English") has the title "Do You
Know What Yiddish Words Really Mean?"  The reader is told
how important Yiddish is, but that "there's an explosion in
the use of Yiddish" is surely a wild exaggeration. The
reader is assured that to be _in_ rather than _out_, one
must know Yiddish. Readers who don't know certain Yiddish
words might not get the joke.  The primary association here
is with humor: "Learn words rich in humor and sarcasm" and
"Above all, Yiddish is a language rich in humor and
sarcasm."  (Remember "What makes Yiddish Yiddish" -- L.
P.).  Here is a "dictionary of rich and colorful Yiddish
words and phrases that have become part of the English
language."  In addition, "You will also find entries for
'Yinglish'.  These colorful words and phrases...originated
when America's Yiddish speaking immigrants first
encountered the English language."

Following these confident allurements (none of which is
remotely true and all of which are based on a deep and
cultivated ignorance) readers are given a short quiz of
eleven questions, the "answers" to which will make them as
savvy as the author.  This little quiz, which strains to be
witty and is presumably not to be taken straight, is
nonetheless symptomatic of a certain shallow and
meretricious strain in American Jewish life.
 
Did you know...
 
1.  The difference between _shlemiel_ and _shlimazel_?
(cf. Yiddish _shlumiel_, which apparently coalesced with
German Schlemihl and _shlimazl_ -- L.P.)
 
2.  When you should -- or should never -- say "_Mazel
tov_"?  (cf. Y. _mazl-tov_ -- L.P.)
 
3.  The distinction between _tsimmes_ and
_tsures_?  (cf. Y. _tsimes_ and _tsores_ -- L.P.)
 
4.  That which word of a phrase you emphasize may offend --
or save you from offending -- someone in a conversation?
 
5.  When to say _oy_ and when to say _gevalt_? (There is a
difference.) (cf. Y. _gevald_/_gvald_ -- L.P.)
 
6.  What makes a _bialy_ different from a _bagel_ (so
you'll never mistake the two)?  (cf. Y. beygl; _byali_ as a
bread name seems to be a Jewish-English coinage, apparently
named for the city of origin, Bialystok, rather than for
being made of white flour.  In Warsaw during the Nazi
period, Jews living as Aryans outside the ghetto used
_byali_ {Polish 'white'} as a code word to refer to those
like themselves {see Yidishe shprakh XVIII, p. 27} -- L.P.)
 
7.  The difference between a _shlump_ and a _zhlub_?  (cd.
Y. _shlumper_ {_Yidishe shprakh_ IV, p. 70} and _zhlob_ --
L.P.)
 
8.  Just what they mean on talk shows when they say _bubee_
-- and the tremendous distinction between _bubee_ and
_bubbe_?  (cf. Y. _bobe_)
 
9.  In what circumstances it would be scandalous to ask how
someone is?
 
10. The difference between "the whole _megile_" and "the
whole _shmeer_"?  (cf. Y. _shmir_ -- L.P.)
 
11.  What type of news should make you _plotz_ and what
kind should make you _kvell_ (cf. Y. _plats_ and _kvel_ --
L.P.)
 
Even the editors of serious journals cannot transcend
certain stereotypes regarding Yiddish.  Thus an article by
David L. Gold on Yiddish romanization submitted to _Shma_
was published under the title "Yortsayt, Yahrzeit,
Jahrzeit, Oy Yiddish!".  This editorial vandalism was
apparently thought to be funny. The notepaper of a
prominent American Jewish leader carries a large logo
consisting of a blue and white bus with a Jewish star on
the door, happy faces in the windows and printed on the
side the words "ALL ABOARD the UJA / BAH-LA-BUS," the
latter aping Yiddish _balebos_ 'householder' and here
printed so as to suggest Yiddish letters. There are
minarets in the background to suggest that the bus is in
the Land of Israel, whose landscape is here exclusively
Arabic -- what a strange symbolization of modern Jewish
Israel!

The notepaper is meant to be fresh, witty and spirited and
it is certainly well-intentioned.  My criticism is by no
means directed at the person who designed the notepaper for
his private use. I wish merely to point out that the use of
Yiddish in this ludic fashion adds to the stereotyping and
trivialization of a language whose range is enormous.
 
It is quite amazing how often Yiddish is misrepresented --
no longer so much in dictionaries and encyclopaedias, as
was formerly the case, but in many novels, short stories,
dramas, news items.  This is frequently simply a matter of
misinformation, not necessarily involving ludicization.
Sometimes the misrepresentation arises through
inappropriate or biased contextualization.  Something of
this sort appears to have occurred in Andrzej Wajda's
recent controversial film about Janusz Korczak.  Tamar
Vital pointed to the problem: "It is interesting to note
that in Wajda's ghetto no Yiddish is spoken. The only time
it is heard is in the cafe where black marketeers and
collaborators come to relax.  There, an entertainer sings a
Yiddish song, flinging her arms above her head and wearing
her shawl about her shoulders in a manner more resembling a
Gypsy than a Jewess" (Tamar Vital, "Jewish hero, Polish
saint; An unusual semidocumentary new film by Polish
director Andrzej Wajda turns Janusz Korczak from a Jewish
victim into a national martyr," :HP1.The Jerusalem Post
Magazine:EHP1. 24 January 1992, 10).  Few Poles ever
inquired as to what Yiddish culture was about when it was
about.  In a distinguished Polish film Yiddish becomes the
language of black marketeers in a sleazy cafe. This is the
same language in which Yitskhok Katsenelson (1885-1944)
wrote "Dos lid fun oysgehargetn folk."
 
Yude-Leyb Proger
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol 1. 155
