Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 1 no. 32
June 26, 1991
 
1) Introduction (Ari Davidow)
2) Notes on Yiddish (Noyekh Miller)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 25 Jun 91 18:39:10 pdt
From: well!ari@apple.COM
Subject: bio?

Hi,
I'm Ari Davidow. I write a weekly column on Jewish
telecommunications for the Northern California Jewish
Bulletin. I also host the Jewish discussion area on the
WELL (a commercial computer conferencing system based
in Sausalito, CA), and edit the E-HUG (electronic
Hebrew Users Group) digest. For a living I do desktop
publishing, specializing in Hebrew and Yiddish. I have
to confess that, while, I have considerable fluency in
Hebrew, my Yiddish knowledge is limited to American-
isms, and that knowledge of the specialized characters
used by Yiddish that are common to all typographers in
my position.

On the other hand, one of the reasons why I am so
excited by Mendele and yiddish.mail is the way they
prove (conclusively, imho) that Yiddish is not a minor
sideline of the Hebrew alphabet, but an important and
living language. The existence of these journals give
some weight to my demands of software manufacturers
that Israeli Hebrew is not the sole relevant use to
which the Hebrew alphabet is used, and may ultimately
result in better tools for us to use in communicating
in Yiddish (and Hebrew). At least, that's what I'm
hoping to see.

ari

Ari Davidow      Internet:    ari@well.sf.ca.us
      From CIS: >INTERNET: ari@well.sf.ca.us  
From Applelink: ari@well.sf.ca.us@internet#

"If there were a computer for the rest of us, it would
know how to work in the languages other than English
that the rest of us speak.
2)----------------------------------------------------

Date: Wed, 26 Jun 91
From: Noyekh Miller (nmiller@trincc)
Subject: Notes on Yiddish

[Note: what follows is a bid at getting some literary
discussion going.  The writer is himself not competent
at this, but if someone now were to come along and do
the job properly..]

                         Vayhi

                     Noyekh Miller

'Vayhi bimey akhilas kest.'  Thus Mendele begins his
story, "Seyfer Hagilgulim".  A typical opening for
Mendele: droll but also tsu der zakh.  

First a look at how it's done.  'Vayhi': what follows
will be biblical.  'Vayhi bimey': biblical, specifical-
ly the Megile Esther, read on the feast day of Purim. 
Now contradictions.  'Vayhi bimey akhilas' is unexpect-
ed since 'akhilas' is more closely associated with
'akhilas moror': the feast turns bitter. Recall as well
that megile and gilgul have a common root: things are
turning over, changing.  Finally 'vayhi bimey akhilas
kest': switching from Hebrew to Yiddish signals a move
(changed, mgilgul gevorn) from the sacred to the pro-
fane, from a joyous, even licentious, feast day to the
routine and regulated life of room and board, from
adult competence in avoiding danger (without God's help
in the case of Purim be it noted) to immature dependen-
cy.  

'Hamavdil beyn koydesh l'khoyl'.  Mendele, instead of
preserving that distinction, conflates the sacred with
the secular, makes things seem heymish, cozy.  But
heymish with a twist, a mordant restatement of his
principal theme: that Jews who were once a people
capable of dealing with their own destiny have (at
least in eastern Europe) become a band of feckless
beggars and shlimazels.

An isolated instance?  Hardly.  Mendele does it dozens
of times.  And here's Sholem Aleykhem playing the same
tune from the opposite direction: 'a kaptsen hagodoyl
v'hagiber v'hanoyre' (from "Doktoyrim").  The familiar
'kaptsen godel' is one thing, the exuberant gloss on
the shimenesra, aka shemona esrey or Eighteen Benedic-
tions, is something quite different.  As with Mendele,
funny and heymish.  And bitter: using the same words to
describe a poor man's plight and God's majesty.

My goal in this essay is not however to discuss Mendele
or Sholem Aleykhem but to speculate about the world
they wrote for and the Yiddish that was once spoken or
at least understood in that world.  The role that
Hebrew once played in Yiddish was qualitatively differ-
ent from the role of any other language.  When Ameri-
can writers use a French word they at the very least
flatter their readers by imputing to them a certain
level of knowing.  True as well no doubt for Yiddish
writers who used Hebrew.  But aside from the class or
educational dimension, and the readers I think under-
stood it so, was the sacred-secular.  Hebrew in Yiddish
had a resonance, now almost entirely gone, of the
prayer book, of countless daily rituals.  Even Jews
with a minimal knowledge of Hebrew could be counted on
to catch the drift of a Biblical, Talmudic or synagogue
tag.  

In what follows, I'm not talking about the "normal" use
of Hebrew words and expressions, i.e. ones that have
long ago become an inseparable part of the lan-guage,
so much so indeed that they have become part even of
host languages: meshuga in Germany, cobber (khaver) in
Britain, chutspa in the U.S.  Nor do I have in mind,
and for the same reason, the kind of Hebrew that finds
its way into the Yiddish spoken in Orthodox circles
today.  I exclude these because in both cases the use
of Hebrew is essentially unself-conscious: the Hebrew
is not chosen over Yiddish equivalents 'for effect' but
because it's customary or the best avail-able.  

If we look then only at Hebrew used 'for effect' what
kind of 'effect' are we talking about?  I propose anti-
clericalism, of which I see two forms: ironic detach-
ment and the direct frontal assault.  (Actually, the
very existence of a Yiddish literature with or without
Hebrew is evidence of a Kulturstreit and all early
Yiddish writers were by definition on one side of the
divide, but I prefer to leave that alone for the time
being.)

The examples from Mendele and Sholem Aleykhem belong to
the first type.  In both cases either Mendele or 'Pani'
Sholem Aleykhem (or one of his detached surrogates such
as the 'commis-voyadzher' of the Ayzenban Geshikhtes,
reminiscent of Faulkner's sewing machine salesman,
V.K.Ratliff) stand outside the give-and-take.  Mendele
may be harsh in his judgments but he never gets in-
volved.  Sholem Aleykhem is less likely to condemn but
he also restricts his role to recording what he sees
and is told.  

But why Hebrew?  What does Hebrew have to do with
ironic detachment?  Briefly, this: the use of uncommon
though generally-understood Hebrew serves to underscore
the vision of a rapidly changing society and a disinte-
grating culture.  Biblical and Mishnaic Hebrew serve as
benchmarks whereby the reader, even though _and pre-
cisely because_ he/she understands them can grasp the
degree to which the traditional culture of eastern
European Jews had already disappeared.  For this is a
Hebrew whose world (either the shul itself or the
Jewish past as constructed and filtered through its
language) is about to become as dead for most Jews as
Latin has been for an even longer time for most Chris-
tians.

But not only as a benchmark.  When we recall that most
of the Hebrew words and phrases have a heavy sacramen-
tal loading, a _pairing_ of Hebrew and Yiddish implies
a breaking down of the distinction between the sacred
and the profane.  Hefker velt.  

So much for the ironic uses of Hebrew.  What of the
frontal assault?  I think it's basically this: where
Mendele and Sholem Aleykhem (both of them thoroughly
bourgeois and conventional) duly recorded the end of
the world as it once existed, the more radical
veltlikhe celebrated it.  If Mendele ended with hefker,
these begin with it; they're possessed by a positively
antinomian urge.  Instead of pairing uncommon Hebrew
with Yiddish, the more radical factions used _familiar_
Hebrew that had been thoroughly Yiddishized and cor-
rupted it by changing one of its terms.  Olev hasholem
becomes olev hashnabel or olev hashulekhts; loshn
koydesh becomes lokshn koydesh; etc.    

However, even antinomians know about the difference
between the holy and its opposite; they're just as much
obsessed by the distinction as their observant opposite
numbers (a Yom Kippur Ball is after all still a cele-
bration of Yom Kippur); and this accounts for the kind
of Hebraisms I've just described.  

Both styles have of course disappeared long ago.  The
generations of Yiddish-speaking Jews for whom there was
a critical distinction between Shabes and the rest of
the week are gone.  And so are those for whom militant
anti-religious behavior was important.  I suggest that
this explains the virtual absence of this kind of
Hebrew in the work of those later writers who knew the
language as well as Mendele did (Chaim Grade, Aaron
Zeitlin, the Singers, J.J. Trunk).  These writers left
us some wonderful work, but (even when like Zeitlin
they take up classic themes) their use of language is
thoroughly modern, i.e. a language in which the work of
desacralization has been achieved.  
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol 1.32
