
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 5.157
October 30, 1995

1) Dialects, standards and khsidim (Eliyahu Juni)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 29 Oct 1995 20:30:39 -0500
From: ao107@freenet.carleton.ca
Subject: Dialects, standards and khsidim--bove kame

In vol. 5.130, Arre Komar asked some questions which I've been meaning to
darshen about for some time now.  I know the subject has all but died,
but I've been saving a bunch of digests and waiting for a chance to go
through them, and have finally gotten around to adding my piece.  (Arre's
questions became connected to a wider discussion of dialects as well, so
I'll kill two birds with one stone, and try to keep it somewhat shorter
than the original Boves ;-}.  My apologies to Reb Khayem Bokhner, whose
motion "genik shoyn" I am so flagrantly disregarding.)


Arre's questions were:

1.  Is there a "proper" Yiddish, which dialect speakers are aware of and
against which they measure their own speech?  Or is Yiddish "only" a
collection of dialects, and the "standard" just a modern academic
construct?

2.  How does the academic standard dialect relate to the dialect of the
remaining native Yiddish-speaking communities?  And if there are
discrepancies, shouldn't the living language be authoritative, unless its
speakers admit that they're speaking "colloquially" and not properly?


I think the answer to the first question is yes, there is a "proper"
Yiddish, sort of;  but yes, Yiddish is only a collection of dialects.

When I talk to native speakers about Yiddish, many of them repeat the
platitude that "Yiddish isn't a 'real' language", and justify it on the
grounds that every speaker of Yiddish modifies it and borrows from the
surrounding (dominant) language according to their own whims, so there's
no single (i.e. "real") language.

But when they are themselves improvising, native speakers will sometimes
contrast what they're saying with "real" Yiddish.  For example:  my
grandparents will speak of renting an apartment as "ts'farrentn a dire",
but when asked about it, will say, "of course, really in Yiddish you
should say 'fardingn', not 'farrentn'."

Also, when discussing dialects of Yiddish, my relatives will sometimes
say that Litvishe Yiddish is "better" or "purer" than other dialects (no,
they aren't themselves Litvaks).  But they won't use it as a standard
against which to measure their own Yiddish --they'll only say so when
talking about different dialects or what's "proper" Yiddish.  And they
will say that so-and-so speaks a "good Yiddish," even if the person in
question is not a Litvishese-speaker; it's more a matter of being able to
express oneself, even in areas where most Yiddish speakers might be at a
loss for words, without having to resort to wholesale borrowing.

[I think their impression is that Litvishe Yiddish is less replete with
local borrowings than their own (as opposed to borrowings which are
common to all dialects, and become a part of the language as a whole);  I
have that impression too. (It occurred to me that to the Poylishe or
Galitsyaner ear, Litvishe Yiddish sounds the most like German, but I
don't know if that would determine what would be considered the better
dialect;  the pronunciation differences are not specific to Yiddish--they
apply to Hebrew as well--so they may not be associated with Yiddish.  It
can't be because Litvishese sounds most like the standard--these are
people who don't even know the standard exists.)  Allan Edell suggested
(in v. 5.136) that this sort of thing could be due to the Lite's
intellectual reputation, but that doesn't seem all that likely to me.]

So although there may be an awareness on the speaker's part of a "proper"
way of speaking Yiddish, I don't think there is a specific Yiddish which
is the proper one, and of which the various dialects are variations.
(Ingerishe and Poylishe certainly don't consider their Yiddish to be
vartions of Litvishe Yiddish.)


So what is "standard" Yiddish?  This is where my harangue begins.

As Arre suggested, the standard is an academic attempt to codify a
standard language from a collection of dialects.  V'ilu la-avodim
v'lishfokhoys nimkarnu hekherashti, ki eyn hatsar shoyve bneyzek
haloshoyn (cf. Esther 7:4).  It's not a particular dialect of Yiddish
which is being touted as the standard (the way Parisian French is
standard French).  It's a supposed amalgamation of dialects, which sounds
a bit strange to any and every native speaker.  Its grammar and
vocabulary are a mixture of all dialects, but I think most people's
impressions of dialect differences come from sounds.

To me (and I imagine to most ingerishe, poylishe, and galitsyaner
speakers), the standard sounds litvish.  [Allan said much the same.]  But
to litvaks, it sounds most un-litvish, because it has a khoylem and shin
instead of kheylem and sin.  (Ironically enough, it's exactly the same as
modern Yeshivishe pronunciation (both Hebrew and Yiddish), which is the
standard in today's "Litvishe" yeshiva world.)  At the haymishe speaker's
first glance, it smacks of imposing Litvishese as a standard.  (To
today's haymishe speakers, most of whom come from the ingerishe and
galitsyaner khsidishe communities, that is not a good thing--in addition
to the general cultural issues, there are overtones of litvishe yeshives
and haskole.  It bothered me too, and prompted some comments I made a
while back about using litvishe diminutives and pronunciations of names.)
And once indignant litvishe purists have set us straight, we realize it's
an imposition of a non-dialect as a standard.

<begin intonation pattern for learning g'more> Mayle, if you tell me that
my dialect is wrong because dialect x is "right," I can laugh and go
along (cf. Esther).  But if you tell me that my dialect is wrong because
it doesn't fit an artificial, pareve language constructed by a professor
from a university, I can't accept that for a minute.  (The fact that it's
yidishistn and academics who are doing the imposing doesn't help.)  It is
analogous to an English academic composing a "standard" English which
included aspects of British, American Australian, Indian and every other
English dialect, and expecting all the English-speaking people in the
world to stick to it.  It's an insult to Yiddish, and Yiddish-speakers in
general, to make us give up differences and pas-tsi to this "standard".
<end intonation pattern for g'more>

[Reb Khayem Bokhner expressed some doubt as to the severity of Yiddish
prescriptivism.  My (limited) experience, especially outside Mendele, has
been that many yidishistn are extremely dogmatic about the standard.  Reb
Khayim made allowances for the classroom, claiming it's necessary;
necessary or not, I'm not so generous.  And even outside the classroom, I
have been repeatedly admonished that the way I am speaking is *wrong*
(yes, people often do put it that strongly).  One of my chastisers even
insisted that there is no such thing as a dialect difference, except in
the area of vocabulary;  using 'mikh' and 'dikh' as reflexives, which is
normal in most dialects, was categorically wrong by her.  As for
tsheperay among speakers of different dialects, it's usually in terms of
better and worse, not right and wrong, and forms a most delicious part of
Yiddish culture;  see below.]

Even for those of us who are good at swallowing insults, the standard is
a barrier:  I have an easier time dealing with  (and translating to and
from) litvishe Yiddish, which I know and don't quite love, than with a
standard which is nisht ahin un nisht aher.  For anyone who comes from
the modern native-speaking community, Litvishese is familiar, even if
it's not as common as the Hungarian dialect;  the standard is utterly
foreign.

[Allan said (5.136) that the standard is the lowest common denominator,
in that no one will find it jarring.  I think otherwise:  haymishe
speakers may well understand it (we're mostly used to juggling dialects),
but will often find it jarring, since it doesn't quite fit the dialect
divisions we're used to.]


And even more than the pronunciation and vocabulary differences, the
"standard" loses out on the geshmak of the contrasts between dialects.
(Miriam Isaacs made a comment in this direction in vol. 5.134, and I
agree with her wholeheartedly; her evidence, Dzhigan & Shumakher, is
ironclad.)  The beauty of each of the dialects is that it has a
particular character, in the way it sounds, the words it uses, and the
cultural baggage it carries.  The differences between, e.g., litvishe and
ingerishe Yiddish are as much in the pictures and stereotypes they
conjure as in the language.

By just shifting some vowels, one can move from the image of an alter
mirrer bokher, scrawny, sophisticated, cynical and earthy, to a
galitsyaner oyberkhukhem, jolly, wisecracking, sharp, always three steps
ahead of himself, at once deadly serious and not serious at all.  Slow
down, add a lisp and a singsong, and you've moved to the Hungarian
balebatishe yid, comfortable, well-fed, stable, conservative, not too
smart, definitely not too sophisticated, with down-to-earth ideas and
aspirations.  Drop the diphthongs and lengthen the vowels, and you have a
Rumanian farmer--a Hungarian without the money or the refinement it
brings.

And that's just geography;  slight shifts of vocabulary can take you from
big city to tiny shtetl, from a yeshive to a rebbe's hoyf, or to a
medeival 20th century farm, or the mikve on a Friday afternoon, or a
cafe', or a meeting of the Bund.  The more I've been exposed to the
standard, the more I've realized how much it's missing;  if you'll excuse
my saying so, s'hot nisht kan taam in nisht kan rayekh.

Someone recently quoted Reb Zellig Bach as saying that learning to speak
a standard is a matter of building or maintaining self-respect.  I don't
see it that way.  I do think that speaking/learning a particular dialect
properly, as opposed to a mishmash, without losing its character and
flavour, can be a matter of self-respect  (I think someone else suggested
this as well).  But sticking to a colourless, arbitrary standard, and
thereby subverting the expressiveness and beauty of the language, does
not provide or maintain self-respect;  for one who knows that beauty, it
can be debasing.  It's almost as if it had been translated into another
language, and lost half its charm.  We recently debated the advisability
of promoting Yiddish literature in translation (the pro was seen as
greater exposure, and the con as a loss of identity); for me, the
"standard" is a step in the same direction.

(to be continued)

Eliyahu Juni

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 5.157

