Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 1 no. 158
February 2, 1992
 
1) A brivele fun front (Mikhl Herzog)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sat, 1 Feb 92  18:22 EST
From: ZOGUR@CUVMB.BITNET
Subject: Various

Hello Leonard. Welcome back. It's time for me to surface,
too, if only for a little while. I'm in the throes of
trying to get a handle on Atlas Volume 3. (Volume 1 is in
press and it's just possible that I'll have a (n unbound)
copy in hand at the June Conference in Jerusalem. Volume 2
is nearing completion. Volume 3 doesn't leave me much time
for anything else.
 
     Your Cairo material was a revelation, the Yiddish
Shakespeare material informative, your piece on "ludic"
Yiddish impressive (even moving). The "bus" item reminded
me of a call I received from the US patent office some
years ago. To their credit, they check out things like
this. They were inquiring about the potential offensiveness
of a patent application for some kind of paper cup to be
called "goyisher cup".
 
     Songs of the type that you mention are legion, of
course. In the late forties, they were constantly blaring
from loudspeakers at record shops in the Times Square area.
Mickey Katz (Joel Grey's father) was their chief exponent.
They remind me of a story about Gershon Sholem at the
Jewish Theological Seminary in New York. The late Saul
Lieberman is reported to have introduced him as follows:
"Ladies and gentlemen, as you know, mysticism is nonsense
but, as Professor Gershon Sholem will soon demonstrate, the
study of nonsense is scholarship". Mark Slobin demonstrates
much the same.
 
     A propos of the "playfulness" issue, there may be a
rather special claim that one can make for Yiddish
speakers, rather than for the language itself, that's worth
mentioning. It involves a more than usual
language-consciousness, what Max Weinreich calls
"komponentn-visikeyt", that may be implicated in the
feeling that the language itself is playful. Traditionally,
the native Yiddish speaker was, by definition, nearly
always bi- or multi-lingual. It was part of his/her
"condition". S/he was always "in contact" with one or more
of the stock languages that contributed to the making of
Yiddish in the first place: Hebrew/Aramaic texts, German, a
Slavic language. Interlingual punning was possible and
frequent; "etymologizing" was (and remains) a favorite
sport.  Interdialectal word-play is no less frequent and
may provide a class of unambiguously Yiddish jokes where,
among other things, roosters and hens, fathers and furs,
etc. are confused.  About "Yiddish jokes", more later.
 
     Part of the same syndrome (resulting from multilingual
contacts) is the authority with which Yiddish speakers make
judgments about what is or is not a "Yiddish word". I've
spent hundreds of hours interviewing native speakers (and
hundreds more listening to interviews conducted by others)
and the subject of what constitutes a Yiddish word for
speakers of different regions is always amusing and
sometimes quite startling. The changing perception of what
is Yiddish, German, Polish, Hebrew is worth some study in
itself. In Jerusalem (!), I interviewed an informant from
Western Poland who told me, in reply to a question about
the expression "skotsl kumt" (skocl kimt, that is) "Nayn,
ints omer nish geret kan Ivrit in der haym".
 
(Anyone out there know the expression, or a variant of it?
What does it mean?)
 
     Concerning the matter of STY which you've raised,
transcription and otherwise: To those who are resentful of
what appears to be Litvish chauvinism, I hope I don't have
to defend my credentials as a khosid of distinctive dialect
differences. Three things though: i) It's not just more
difficult for others if everyone makes "shabes far zikh"
with respect to rendering Yiddish in latin letters, it's
disrespectful to the language to treat it as if there were
no standards. Our newspapers and journals try very hard to
respect the prevailing standards of transcription from
Cyrillic, Chinese, etc. Why shouldn't we insist on the same
with respect to Yiddish? ii) As a rule, we transliterate.
Transliteration is a rendering of "letters" not of "sounds"
(EXCEPT with respect to the Hebrew-origin words) from one
alphabet to another. There's an advantage to the 1-1
relationship between letter(s) and sounds in the STY
system. To elaborate on the difficulty that Bob Goldberg
has with non- standard romanization, think of the problem
of having to decide whether "hun" is 'rooster' or 'hen';
whether "breyt" is 'bread', 'board' or 'broad'; iii)
Finally, be consoled (and grateful?): although STY
pronunciation is nearly the same as Litvish, STY grammar is
about as far from Litvish as you can get. This is where our
Noyekh and other Southeasterners get their due.  The STY
case and gender system is largely that of the Ukraine
(oops! of Ukraine, that is).
 
     Your message to Meylekh/Melekh was much to the point.
"Melekh" belongs to that group of Hebrew seg(h)olate nouns
that merge with tseyre in Yiddish. There are three groups
of seg(h)olate nouns in Yiddish (there's an interesting
paper by Dovid Katz on the subject): i) emes, elul--always
e (as in 'bet'); ii) khesed--(like the words, regn, betn,
lebn)-- regionally, e (as in velt), ey (as in English
'gate'), i (as in 'kiss'; iii) melekh, pesakh--regionally
ey ('gate') or ay ('might'). There's a very telling example
in the film "Image Before My Eyes": you may recall a woman
singing "Moyde Ani" in a song that combines Hebrew and
Yiddish. She sings: (Heb.) "moyde ani" (Yidd.) "ikh dank
dikh"; "veymen dank ikh?" (Heb). "meylekh" (Yidd.) "deym
maylekh".
 
     What DOES make a "Yiddish" joke, particularly when
it's rendered in another language? I remember that in one
of my first classes with Uriel Weinreich we tried to come
up with criteria. Setting language and culturally
determined topics aside, we tried to arrive at structural
criteria. What (theoretically universal) devices that made
things "funny" were favored?  Try the following: i) The
"superclimax". After you've got them laughing, hit them
with the punchline; e.g. the first anecdote on the record
"You don't have to be Jewish" ("A call from Long Island"):
"Does that mean you're not coming?". ii) The quantification
of non-quantifiable qualities: "She's only a little bit
pregnant" or (if you recall the item in Royte Pomerantsn)
"Oykh mir a shtot!".  iii) The subversion of one's own
interests, as when the shadkhn says "megst redn hekher,
zi'z nokh a bisele toyb dertsu". Whaddaya think?
 
     Anyway, it's good to hear from you again.
 
     Thanks for regards from Kieve Ziv (ne Finkleman). An
old, old friend. But, who is Shifra? His daughter (in-law)?
His wife is Naomi. Speaking of friends, you apparently
preceded me in Vandans last summer. I spent a wonderful
week with Hugh and Edith in August (then in London in
November). Did you get to visit the Jewish Museum in
Hohenems? The recording of Hugh's rendition of a Western
Yiddish text is quite impressive.
 
     Speak to you again soon.
 
     Mikhl.
 
------------
Mina Graur:  There is no connection between Yiddish
"khoyzek" and the Hebrew root "hzq". The spelling in
Yiddish, which may be the result of it having been
interpreted as of Hebrew origin, reinforces the assumption.
It's "Hebreoid" like the names "Zalman" and "Kalman",
spelled zlmn, klmn. I think Max Weinreich offers a Low
German etymology (but since his Yiddish text has no index,
I can't be more specific than that now).
 
_______
 
Moyshe-Non Eytan:
 
     Yiddish "grayz" is probably derived from (Ashkenazic)
Hebrew "gri-es" (gr'iuth).
 
     Dov Sadan attributed the expression "Noyekh mit zibn
grayzn" to the reinterpretation of "krayzn" 'circles' as
"grayzn" 'mistakes'. Somewhere, at some time, children were
apparently taught to write in a manner similar to the "join
the numbers" games. They joined patterns of circles to form
each letter. I don't think I can reproduce it here but
"nun" is written by joining three 'krayzn', "khes" by
joining four 'krayzn'; together, zibn krayzn gives you
"Noyekh". The etymology, of course, doesn't change the fact
that the expression "shraybn Noyekh mit zibn grayzn" means
precisely what you said it means.
 
________
 
Bob Goldberg:
 
Despite my promise, I hesitate to get back to the matter of
"Heirat" and "harey at". I can understand that you bristled
at my assertion (not theory or hypothesis) that there was
no relationship between the two, (although, I wouldn't
bristle if you made some assertion about computers), but I
don't understand your saying that you remain "unconvinced"
by the evidence provided by Aren Abramson. Before going on,
perhaps you should explain the nature of the evidence that
you would find convincing. Linguists, after all, work with
different tools than computer specialists. Of necessity,
the nature of the evidence we adduce in support of our
conclusions is going to be different.
 
________
 
Back to work!
 
Mikhl Herzog
 
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol 1.158

