
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 3.068
July 24, 1993

1) To Dovid Braun (Reyzl Kalifowicz-Waletzky)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sat Jul 24 14:04:51 1993
From: Roslyn Kalifowicz-Waletzky <0005943838@mcimail.com>
Subject: To Dovid Braun

To Dovid Braun,

      Yo, s'iz take modne far undz tzu redn english, ober az men
muzh, muzh men.

>Reyzl, your mention of the Xmas decorations on the suke where so
>interesting and could really be instructive about how cultural
>patterns are transferred.  I would guess that it was no problem
>for the Boro Park (or Williamsburgh or whatever) person to use these
>"for Xmas" decorations because she was living in a purely Jewish
>neighborhood where the possibilty of a Jew putting up Xmas
>decorations was nil, and where there was no or very little cultural
>contact between Jews and Christians who use these decorations
>forXmas.  I.e., the woman might not have had strong associations
>with Xmas because she wasn't in a neighborhood where there much
>Xmas.  On the other hand, a Jew living among (Jews and) Christians
>would specifically associate the decorations with Xmas, and thus
>wouldn't be likely to use the decoration him/herself.  If so, a
>conclusion is that cultural forms adopted by Jews from coterritorial
>cultures were not adopted as a result of tremendously strong
>cultural interaction with the non-Jews, but because Jews were
>somehow exposed to these forms and brought them back into their own
>communities where the Christian (or what have you) association was
>missing, and further cultivated them within their closed community.
>(Take, for example, the dying of eggs among Ashkenazim -- obviously
>reminiscent of Easter eggs, but apparently having lost that
>association.)

>Tell us more about that decorations discovery, please.

      First off, khasidim in New York have always lived in mixed
neighborhoods no matter how concentrated their population seems to
be. There have never been "purely Jewish neighborhoods" in Brooklyn.
The same goes for Boro Park, Williamsburg, etc. today.  They do see
Christmas decorations and Christmas symbols in store windows, ads,
newsprint, etc. as we all do.  It's unavoidable even if you don't
watch television.  I think they are familiar with the major
Christian symbols of pine tree, pine wreath, red and green color
combo, etc.  These are symbols that everyone in America knows.  The
plastic cut-out decorations that I was referring to are indoor
decorations (often used to decorate Christmas trees) and are perhaps
not as readily seen by Khasidim. Though they are used by non-Jews
only for Christmas as far as I know, they are not always featured in
commercial Christmas displays, perhaps because they are a cheap item
and commercially unprofitable.  You will sometimes see flat
one-dimensional cutouts that look like snowflakes in all kinds of
window displays, and they are clearly Christmas symbols.  But the
ones my friend Shifra Epstein was investigating are the
multi-dimensional, ornate ones made from mylar and imported here in
the last 10? 20? years from the Orient.  What is intriguing for me
is that not only are they very similar to the kinds of papercuts
European Jews used to hang in their sukkas, but they also resemble
the ornate papercuts (made, following tradition, of paper) that I
once saw in the Bobover Shul's sukka I believe in 1977, handmade by
children in their summer camp.  So now comes Shifra's question.  She
basically asked the khasidic lady (not in my presence): How come you
are now buying mylar papercuts that are distinctly produced by
Christians for Christians for a goyisher Christmas and the package
clearly states on it "For Christmas"?  Her answer basically was,
"What's the problem, here?  They are very pretty and I can use them
in the way I want for my holiday. They are not Christmas for me."

      I think that what we have here is a very practical approach to
cultural forms.  These mylar papercuts are selected first because
they are pretty.  Gut genug.  Second, they look like the kinds of
papercuts European Jews used to make for their sukkas, forms once
very popular among all Jews but especially khasidim.  What could be
more wonderful for khasidim today!  Third, these today are made of
indestructible mylar and will maintain their fancy forms all eight
days no matter wind or rain.  What could be better!  Traditional
papercuts are made of paper and they always fall apart in the rainy
weather.  In view of all these very practical considerations, why
should a khasidic lady let the fact that it says on the package "for
Christmas" stand in the way of her enjoying the multiple benefits of
such an innovative product?  I am sure that the fact that they are
also sooooo shiny and come in many rich saturated colors, including
gold and silver, appeals to the taste of folksy ladies.  My point in
mentioning this was that both we and Wexler (via Halkin, we now
know) too often talk of cultural borrowing in terms of influence
from the strong, majority culture upon a weak, minority population.
This is not an accurate description of what is really going on here.
When you closely study folk artists and cultural transmission you
find there is a specific, and different, modus operandi.  Borrowing
quite often occurs on the basis of the folk mind making very
practical and aesthetic choices.  In a strong traditional society
everything is grist for the mill; and practicality and aesthetics
determine what and how much is borrowed, whether it is from the
majority, or neighboring or another, even lower-status minority
culture.  This goes for decorations, music, folk medicine, foods,
and even methods of de-bloodying a carcass, no matter what the
cultural source, even Turkic Barbarians.  Then comes a mental
process of de-stigmatizing, de-Christianizing, neutralizing any
remnant non-Jewish symbolic values before new Jewish symbolic value
is assigned. Victor Turner and Clifford Geerts have written much
about this process of "converting" foreign folk ways and making it
one's own.  It took me years to finally break down and buy these
decorations for my own sukka, mostly because I was worried that my
non-Jewish next door neighbors would think I was really borrowing
from their Christmas ideas. Or else, believe that I was using their
Christmas decorations inappropriately in some stupid little hut we
built outside.

      Dovid, you are right in saying, "If so, a conclusion is that
cultural forms adopted by Jews from co-territorial cultures were not
adopted as a result of tremendously strong cultural interaction with
the non-Jews" but your assertion that borrowing happens in a
monolithic Jewish community where "Christian associations are
missing" is not completely on target.  The conclusion you drew from
my earlier posting is correct but cultural isolation is also not the
only possible scenario where cultural borrowing occurs.  First, as a
former member of those communities, let me tell you that non-Jewish
symbols are rarely unknown in the khasidic community.  If a khosid
ever bought a Christmas decoration (with no crosses or Santa Claus
on it of course), his guests would assume that he either did not
know that it was a Christian artifact or that he knew it but it was
too beautiful to resist; and since the guest is sure that the khosid
is not going to use it in any Christian context, what difference is
it going to make if he is going to enjoy its aesthetic, neutral
value?  However, a Jew who lives in an assimilated world can always
be located somewhere near the outer boundary of Jewish practice and
that person would worry that other Jews may think that he/she has
lost his balance in the difficult juggling of these two worlds.
Such a Jew tries to make sure to mark every boundary very clearly
and avoids any confusing or ambivalent symbols.  The khasidic lady
knows that non-Jews use it as a Christmas decoration. Although she
is buying the item as is, in the same version as a Christian does,
she still doesn't worry that someone will think she is making even a
mild version of Christmas with that decoration.  She knows that she
is placing it in a Jewish context where it will be redefined by the
virtue of that new context.  In this case, she isn't even
"cultivating" it in any way.  In her modus operandi, she can buy it
and benefit from it according to her needs.

      You can compare the folk attitude described above with mine.
For the last few years, I, a somewhat assimilated Jew, have been
wracking my cultural brain about whether to buy beautiful,
decorative, dried flowered- or fruited-wreaths.  I am talking about
the ones that have become so popular in the last years-- the ones
made of anything but Christmassy pine needles.  Now these wreaths
come from a Christian tradition (I think) and have now been
"cultivated" and secularized by an open society for practical and
aesthetic purposes.  For an avid flower lover like me, these wreaths
are most aesthetic and practical; but I cannot get myself to buy
them.  It is as you suggest; I am too aware of their symbolic value.
I stand and ask: At what point does the category of wreaths lose its
Christian association and become a neutral, non-sectarian
decoration?  What marks a wreath as Christian?  Is it the material
used (holly or pine needles)?  Is it the round form itself?  Or is
it the combination of pine needles and round form?  If you are aware
of all the symbolic values an item has in the world, you may first
isolate that marker, strip it and then replace it, giving it a new
symbolic value.  You will then have "recreated" the artifact to suit
your ritual or cultural need.  Or you can just ignore all previous
symbolic value, as that khasidic lady did, and redefine the artifact
in any way you want.  I cannot buy them because I am still too
fearful the Christian associations will not permanently fall away by
that redefinition process.  The only wreath I have bought till now
is one with sliced apples, blueberries and dried rose buds-- a
wreath whose contents are so charming and unusual that they chase
away any Christian association.  I could always attach some Jewish
symbol to a wreath to "Judaize" it; but that worried about it, I am
not.  It's interesting that the "Judaized" ones I have seen at
Jewish crafts fairs always look to me to be stupid and
"nokhgemakht".  (These are the equivalents of "cultivated" Jewish
forms you are asserting in your posting.)

      Maybe this kind of excessive brain-wracking and
consumer-paralysis is what happens to students of decorative
semiotica (one of my academic activities).  But the point I would
like to make with raising the wreath issue is that one finds
scholars/academics, who themselves live in assimilated cultures,
quite often assuming that the folk borrower cares or negotiates the
same issues that he/she does.  When they see a case of cultural
borrowing, they often judge it to be a result of cultural weakness
rather than cultural strength.  In the example of the khasidic lady
and the Christmas decoration, you clearly see a case of cultural
strength, especially when you compare it to my "culturally" weak
position vis-a-vis buying a simple flowered wreath.  I can not seem
to do what these khasidim and Jews have always done so easily, so
naturally, if you will.  That's because the khasidic lady isn't
always worrying and checking for crisscrossed boundaries the way a
self- conscious Jew like me does.  In every society, a substantial
part of the marketplace, whether of ideas or artifacts, is always
open to all cultural groups.  Cultural borrowing is a natural course
of events and not always the result of a minority's cultural
weakness or isolation.  I think that it's often a result of courage
in clearly and distinctly marking your cultural territory and
identity, so that you don't worry about misperception by others.
Now, I certainly never consciously worried that someone will think
that I'll be celebrating even a weak form of Christmas.  But when I
think about the wreath issue, it obvious that I don't feel that all
of my boundaries are water-tight.  God knows, I don't want them to
be, so I am stuck with spending energy checking them when I walk
into a store.  A khasidic lady walking into a store is certainly
also always checking her boundaries vis-a-vis products, probably
with more frustrating results that mine, but in the example I cited
above you see her dealing with "tume" in a much more "liberal" way
than I am.  The same goes for the church hymn that was converted to
"Maoz Tsur" or a khasid converting a peasant drinking song into a
neshomedik nign.  New cultural Jewish forms will probably develop
more easily in that khasidic lady's house than mine. Observing such
"liberal" attitudes among Jews vis-a-vis borrowing foreign cultural
patterns is what makes scholars like Wexler nervous is the point I
was making in my last posting.   But we don't have to be.

      Now that I said all this, maybe I will go out and buy myself a
nice flowered wreath.

      As for your example of dyed Ukrainian Easter eggs as examples
of cultural transmission, I don't think that Jews coloring eggs for
Peysakh is necessarily the result of Ukrainian influences.
Sephardic Jews also dye Peysakh eggs  (called "Huevos haminadav")
with onion peel just like Ashkenazim do.  Sephardim sometimes also
use coffee grinds to dye the eggs.  The result is kind of brown
marbleizing.  Ukrainians paint them with their traditional designs.
I'll tell you more when I'll see you af der yidish vokh.

**Note: There has been talk on this forum of discussing Yiddish
literature not just linguistics.  I have been trying to bring
Yiddish folklore into Mendele.  But God, if I could only do it with
shorter postings!!!

Reyzl Kalifowicz-Waletzky reyzl@mcimail.com

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 3.068

