
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 3.058
July 12, 1993

1) Peretz Miranski (Ana and Hal Berman)
2) Amnon Zipin z"l (David Neal Miller)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun Jul 11 16:39:55 1993
From: BERMAN E-MAIL <berman@mars.senecac.on.ca>
Subject: Peretz Miranski

	Yesterday, July 10, 1993, one of the last remaining Yiddish
writers who belonged to the "Yung Vilne" group of writers passed
away. Peretz Miranski had been ill for the last two years. He was a
poet and a writer of fables who was well known all over the world in
literary circles. Miranski published five Yiddish books and among
his awards were the I.J. Segal prize for Yiddish Literature (twice)
and the Itzik Manger prize in Israel. He was involved in Yiddish
cultural activities in Toronto and was a great source of information
and help to the younger Yiddish generation in this city. He was
particularly close to the Toronto group "Fraynd Fun Yiddish", and
was well respected by all who knew him. He will be greatly missed by
all.

	Ana and Hal Berman

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon Jul 12 12:56:05 1993
From: David Neal Miller <dnmiller@magnus.acs.ohio-state.edu>
Subject: Amnon Zipin z"l

Happily, necrologies have not been the staple on MENDELE that they
have become in much of Ashkenaz. Unhappily, it is my duty to share
with fellow Mendele readers news of the death of Amnon Zipin, late
Judaic Librarian at The Ohio State University.

The appended necrology, distributed by Ohio State's University
Library and posted with their permission, gives most of the
pertinent facts. To these I would recall Amnon's spirited defense of
Yiddish in the face of our Melton Center director's embarrassed
antipathy, his attempts to build bridges between the bibliographical
and interpretive scolarly communities, his tenacious khutspe cloaked
in a mantle of grace and good humor.

We shall miss him.

--

In Memoriam
AMNON ZIPIN

April 10, 1946-June 16, 1993

Amnon was the quintessential research library
bibliographer--evaluated by many as one of the few
scholar-librarians in the United States with the invaluable combined
knowledge of Hebrew, Yiddish, Arabic, Latin, and English, coupled
with unsurpassed expertise in the bibliography of Jewish Studies. He
was the principal architect of the Ohio State University Libraries'
Jewish Studies collection, drawing on his extensive knowledge of the
literature of the field and the related publishing/bookseller
enterprises.

Born in Haifa, Israel, he studied at the University of Haifa,
1967-68. After receiving his B.A. in 1970 from Hebrew University,
Jerusalem, with a major in Arabic history, he came to the United
States to study at Yale University where, in 1972, he received his
M.A. in medieval history. While working at the Yale University
Library as a language and subject specialist, Amnon earned his MLS
degree in 1975 from Southern Connecticut State College. He then
served as the Near East librarian (1976-77) of Washington
University, Seattle. A member of the faculty at Ohio State since
1977, Amnon was promoted to assistant professor in 1983, tenured in
1984, and promoted to associate professor in 1988. There is no
question that he would have attained full rank were it not for his
illness.

A born teacher and a very active participant in bibliographic
instruction, he lectured regularly in Hebrew 241 (Culture of
Contemporary Israel) and Yiddish 341 (Yiddish Culture).
Additionally, he taught in the Libraries' UVC 100 program, offered
workshops in the use of LCS, took part in the library orientation
program for foreign students, and worked frequently on a one-to-one
basis with students and faculty.

Amnon's most significant contribution to research is unquestionably
manifested in the first seven volumes of the _Bibliography of Modern
Hebrew Literature in (English) Translation_ (1979-1985) and the _New
Series_ (1985-86). Supplementing this achievement is his companion
work: _Bibliography of Modern Hebrew Literature in Arabic
Translation_. Beyond this ongoing research and publication endeavor,
he also authored 21 articles and was a consultant for the important
_Hebrew Annual Review_ (produced at Ohio State) since its inception
in 1978.

Nationally and at the University level, Amnon maintained a strong
service profile over the years. Through committee work, chairing,
and presentations, he was very active in the Association of Jewish
Libraries (AJL), the Middle East Librarians Association (MELA), the
Council on Archives and Research Libraries in Jewish Studies and the
Association for Jewish Studies (AJS). Within Ohio Sate, Amnon served
on numerous library and Melton Center committees, reflecting the
high esteem in which he was held by his colleagues. He provided
major contributions while serving on the University Libraries'
Appointment, Promotion, and Tenure Committee, the Task Force on Main
Library Public Services Organization, and the Strategic Planning
Committee. One of his last library efforts was bringing Project
ALEPH--a computer-managed database of catalog records in Hebrew and
Arabic scripts--to Ohio State.

A fitting tribute was paid to Amnon last Fall when the Melton Center
for Jewish Studies established the "Amnon Zipin Student Intern
Position," which is to provide general assistance in the library for
the Jewish Studies bibliographer.

Amnon's interests were many and included travel and bridge,
especially duplicate bridge. He will be sorely missed by the many
whom he often served as a mentor for improving their play.

To be sure, Amnon will be remembered for his many professional
contributions, high standards, leadership, and a ^ne analytical
mind. But he will be equally recalled for his outgoing personality,
warmth, sense of humor, wit, and zest for life. A man of compassion,
integrity, loyalty, and unfailing helpfulness, he will be greatly
missed for a very long time to come.

Individuals wishing to offer a donation in AmnonUs memory may do so
to any of four recipients:

(1)     Hospice of Columbus (181 Washington Blvd., Columbus, OH 43215);
(2)     Michael S. Melton Hebrew [also Yiddish--DNM] Library Fund;
(3)     the OSU Melton Center; or
(4)     the Amnon Zipin Jewish Studies Library Memorial Fund.

Donations for the last three should be made payable to the Ohio
State University, designating the particular recipient, and sent to
the Friends of the Libraries [112 Main Library, 1858 Neil Avenue
Mall, Columbus, Ohio 43210] whose staff will forward appropriately.

--
David Neal Miller       miller.3@osu.edu

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 3.058

