
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 6.017
June 14, 1996

1) Al tiro avdi Yaakov (Bernard S. Greenberg)
2) Attitudes toward Yiddish (Leah Zazulyer)
3) Why Yiddish? (David Herskovic)
4) Mikhl Rosenberg (Heynekh Sapoznik)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 12 Jun 1996 19:08:35 -0400
From: bsg@basistech.com
Subject: Al tiro avdi Yaakov

On Pearl CD GEMM 9285 (British) is a Yiddish-Ukranian-Hebrew folk song,
"Al tiro, avdi Yaakov" performed by Cantor Berele Chagy (1892-1954)
which touches me deeply on account of its recollecting my late
Grandfather (1885-1956) who owned other 78's of this vanished genre by
Hershmann. I am intrigued by the running word-to-word mix of Ukranian,
Yiddish, and Hebrew in this short song; I can make out only bits and
snatches of each (the Ukranian is the least familiar to me). If anyone
is familiar with this song and knows the text, I would be in their debt.
As much of the text as I can make out says, "Fear not, my Servant Jacob,
the Lord has chosen the House of Jacob" and expresses similar sentiments
(horrifyingly ironic in view of the fate of that culture-sphere). Any
input or knowledge on this from anyone familiar with this selection and
genre would delight me. (I will be away next week, so if anyone responds
and I do not thank them then, that is why).

Bernard S. Greenberg

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 13 Jun 1996 08:53:16 -0400 (EDT)
From: watson@uhura.cc.rochester.edu
Subject: Attitudes toward Yiddish

As I review in mind the written and spoken comments I have heard over
the last decades about the survival/death of Yiddish...it seems to me
that there has always been a political undertext:  The association of
Yiddish with the left, the Bund, socialism, political action in Vilna,
the Holocaust, etc.  And now a now a different but basically similar
undertext in the remarks of academicians and "establishment" Jews that
is dismissive of the historical/linguistic significance of the use of
Yiddish by the orthodox. I fear that we have learned nothing in the 20th
century if self hate is fueling statements on the death of Yiddish, and
the insistance of that death!

Some weeks ago, a post on Mendele [6.002 by Nechama and Gershon Winer]
noted some precipitous actions having to do with Yiddish in Israel.
When I try to make sense of these I am inclined to put them in the
context of the recent Israeli political events.  Does anyone know more
about what happened and why?

Leah Zazulyer

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: 13 Jun 96 16:50:50 EDT
From: 100114.750@compuserve.com
Subject: Why Yiddish?

It seems to be the fate of Mendele that every so often someone or
another will reopen the can of worms of Yiddish: its users and its
future. It has been Morrie Feller's turn this time.

First of all I would like to point out an error in the piece by Ruth
Wisse which Morrie kindly summarised.

The statement "In Hasidic communities the use of Yiddish for any purpose
other than to explain Jewish law is not condoned" is incorrect. To the
contrary, it is Yiddish that is used for matters other than Jewish law
as well as for oral discussions of the Jewish law. Ruth Wisse's
statement sounds more like the attitude to Hebrew amongst religious Jews
prior to Ivrit and amongst those Khsidim who still do not speak Ivrit.

But throughout Morrie Feller's posting one question kept on repeating
itself in my mind.

Why? Why should a child or adult who knows nothing about Yiddish bother
to take up this language? For what good reason?

Yiddish is not merely a language; it is a way of life. It was created by
Jews and used by Jews to prevent assimilation and to fulfil Balaam's
words 'a nation that rests solitarily'. But there was a more fundamental
reason. Jews needed a language that best expressed their own
idiosyncratic way of life. A language they could cry in and laugh in;
live in and die in; deal in, haggle in and all else in. This may sound
like life in the shteytl and it is true that Yiddish was spoken in
places outside the shtetl too. But it is out of the rough rock of the
shteytl that Yiddish was hewn and it is in her wild orchards that the
language was cultivated. The shteytl is Yiddish's natural habitat and
only there could it have been immortalised by writers, playwrights, and
poets.

If Yiddish is not a sophisticated language, if it sounds vulgar to the
connoisseur and coarse to the enlightened, it is only because it takes
after its creator and patron, the shtetl Jew. Yiddish is a language for
those who think chopped liver is an alternative (or even superior) to
caviar; Sholem Alaykhem to Shakespeare; klezmer to Beethoven or even
Elvis.

So why should a child or student to whom the shtetl life is quaint and
alien or in many cases even repulsive take to learning a language that
expresses and means nothing to them. Without having experienced any
semblance of this way of life how much of the language will they ever
understand?

How is one to explain the pithiness in a saying like 'mizanavte
dekhazarte loy makhante leshtramalte' to someone who has never learned a
blat gemore? What does 'kamo loki avoysayni' mean to someone who has
never experienced a sayder? What tastes do 'asher loy blintsi avoysayni
bemitsroyim' invoke in the palates of an am-ho'orets who makes hamoytsi
on a radish?

It perplexes me when Mendelisten ask for Yiddish words for obscure
medical or scientific terms. Why on earth wreck your brains when you
will hardly use the word? And when you finally do get to use it could
you not say it so much easier in English?

Then there is the question of where this potential student would use
Yiddish. Morrie Feller suggests creating a virtual 'gas' for Yiddish on
the Internet. With respect, this is a non starter. However undesirable
some people may find a khsidishe shtibl it is still far more hospitable
terrain then sitting in solitary confinement babbling away on the net.
But even if we were to create a 'gas' for Yiddish why would anybody
cruise on this 'gas'? Simply to meet a friend, say 'a giten' and receive
a reply of 'a beseren'? Is it not so much easier for this potential
Yiddish student to walk out of their front door and say Hi! to the first
person they meet?

Now imagine this revival of Yiddish. A quaint and quirky language
brought back from the dead by doctrinaire academics, hoisted on to
apathetic students for no particular reason to be used only in virtual
reality. Sorry, but not much of a language to me.

The main reason given for this obsession with Yiddish is The Holocaust.
The Holocaust destroyed millions of Yiddish speakers in Eastern Europe
and therefore, the argument goes, we, the generations descendant of
these martyrs, owe it to them to maintain and perpetuate their culture.

I ask: Did millions of them not shlog Kapores every year? Did they not
wear tefilin every day? Did they not keep Shabes and Yom-Tev? And on a
more mundane level did they not wear dashiklekh? And did they not live
in ramshackles?

But these gripes aside how much water does this argument hold? By 1940
Hebrew had already gained a stronghold in Israel while Yiddish was
severely in decline in the USA. I contend that the fact that the
Bundistn did not get their way with a Yiddish utopia is proof in itself
that they could never have succeeded.

Blaming the Holocaust for the demise of Yiddish is a fallacy. Holocaust
or no Holocaust, Yiddish would have ended up in much the same way as it
has. All the Holocaust can be accused of, with regards to Yiddish, is of
speeding up a process which was already under way.

The Holocaust offers the best defence to secular Jews obsessed with
Yiddish challenged as to why they are so interested in a language that
their lifestyle has been the main cause of its decline.

Shtetl Jews who made their way to a rosier future left Tevye back at
home and allowed his oldest daughter to accompany them only to the port
while the middle daughter was abandoned on arrival in their 'promised'
land. The only family member that they remained on good terms with was
the youngest daughter and we all know with whom she kept company. Yes,
they tried to transport the aroma of the Shabes cooking and the geshmack
of Yiddish canned in sentimental preservatives and vacuum packed in
nostalgia-tight containers and yes they did succeeded but it was only
for a while. The sell by date was there for anybody who cared to look
and it was for want of time that they did not die sooner.

My prognosis for the future is bright or bleak depending on your vantage
point. The ultra-Orthodox with their high birth rate will continue to
grow at a fast rate. As modern-Hebrew becomes more like any other
language with less of a Jewish flavour to it I believe there could
become a trend in Israel away from Hebrew to Yiddish.

I cannot see, however, literature emanating from this group. Even if
there was a shake up similar to the pre-war years in Poland and Russia
it is unlikely to produce writers and the like. Nowadays a child who
leaves the fold does so more because he is attracted to Michael Jackson
or Arnold Schwartzenegger than because he has been won over by some ism
or other. Besides, the situation amongst the orthodox is not desperate
enough to inspire creative minds.

Amongst the non-Orthodox I see Yiddish limping along always being of
interest to history students and to those interested in the
ultra-Orthodox. As the generation of non-frum Yiddish speakers decline
there will very few to fill their place. Such journals as 'Kind un Kayt'
could be a success but only because they tell the students about
Yiddishkayt in a way which modern Israel, religious and non-religious,
cannot offer. Through projects like these Yiddish could even come round
full circle by introducing secular children to the delights and
pleasures of Judaism. It is after all a funny old world!

David Herskovic

4)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 13 Jun 1996 17:15:47 -0400
From: sapoznik@aol.com
Subject: Mikhl Rosenberg

Vis a vis Mikhl Rosenberg [6.016]: He was not a singer but a comic and
monologiost. His recordings made in the 1940's-1950s for the Banner
label included titles such as "Shepsl Kanarik from Poughkeepsie" ,
"Getsl at a Football Game", "Getsl at a Baseball Game". These were
truncated versions of longer monologs he made famous at Yiddish theater
reviews and Catskill hotels.

Heynekh Sapoznik

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 6.017

