
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 3.048
June 25, 1993

1) Wexler (Reyzl Kalifowicz-Waletzky)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu Jun 24 15:32:31 1993
From: Roslyn Kalifowicz-Waletzky <0005943838@mcimail.com>
Subject: Wexler

Meylekh,

        Though, I am sure that Wexler's monograph is full of
interesting material, I have read of Wexler's theories only in
Philologos.  But if these are the highlights, there is more than
enough meat here to chew on.  Since none of the evidence Wexler
cites there is unknown to those of us in the field (except the
Sorbian connection), I am sorry if anyone thinks my criticism is
premature.

        Wexler's theory is problematic on so many levels one doesn't
know where to begin.  The mere fact that Yiddish grammar is
undoubtedly Germanic is sufficient reason to dismiss the theory, no
matter how many examples of lexical borrowing Wexler can amass.
Khaim Bochner's first posting said it all and Stankiewicz's letter
is excellent.  They argued from a linguistic point of view and I
will discuss some ethnographic "evidence" he cites.

        The only point I would like to add to the linguistic
argument is that the relexification from Judeo-Slavonic or Kanaanic
that he is discussing involves a small population.  The
sociolinguistic process Wexler is focusing on is somewhat similar to
the well-known American case, namely, when the Sephardic character
of of the small Jewish community in America receded once large waves
of Ashkenazic Jewry began to so totally dominate the whole American
Jewish scene.  Such events can happen only if the initial community
is small and the new immigrant population massive.  When one adds up
all the facts and figures, the bulk of Eastern European Jewry is
still undeniably Jewish and Ashkenazic.

        The various Turkic barbarian tribes mixed with everyone once
they settled in Europe, including the Jews; but to characterize
Judeo-Slavonic speakers as a Turkic people is not only impossible by
the very definition of a Jewish language of which Wexler is supposed
to be a specialist but also historically nonsensical.  Some
Turkic-origin pagans may have chosen Judaism over Christianity, but
there is no historical basis that I know of where what happened with
the Khazars happened in Slavic territory, namely, the Khazar king
converted to Judaism and he decreed that his subjects had to do the
same.  Had Wexler had data on large Turkic conversions, he would
have presented it.  I have been studying Turkic influence on
European, Asiatic and especially Jewish arts and crafts for he last
five years and I can tell you that `holletzopf' and `treibern' don't
prove anything.

        My biggest problem with Wexler is that he sees Jews
borrowing cultural folkways/terminology from the Slavs and it seems
to make him very anxious.  What he then does is try to find
historical explanations that would seem to lessen the amount of
borrowing but that then takes him completely so far afield that he
has thrown out the baby with the bath water.  Er iz azoy vayt
dergangen az her hot zey azh gemakht oys Yidn.

        As he states, Wexler "does not base his argument on any
single or central proof; rather, he seeks to build a circumstantial
chain of evidence, the sheer weight of which he hopes will be
convincing."  As I see it, no link that Philologos mentions supports
his chain.  We could pick on any citation, but let's take `koyletsh'
since Philologos mentions it twice as one of the proofs that Yiddish
began in the East. First, khale is both a primary symbol and means
of creating the beauty and distinction of the sacred time and space
of Shabbes.  The homemaker's goal is to maximize its beauty and
uniqueness of her Shabbes tish and would therefore easily seek out
or imitate such an intriguing and clever design as braided bread if
she would see it in the marketplace.  Decorative foods are usually
among the first and easiest of cultural exchanges, especially in
view of the decorative goal of the Shabbes tish and the important
role of Khale there.  Jewish bakers selling to peasants may have
decided to bake a few such breads for themselves and this intriguing
practice spread.  In view of the symbolic importance of khale, no
geographic displacement theory of Jewish communities from east to
west is necessary to explain dissemination of what was then such a
novelty item.  Any assumption that Jews must have eaten at Slavic
tables is also superfluence in this case.

        Secondly, making decorative breads in honor of festive
occasions was a very common folk activity (in pre-automation times)
throughout Europe.  As shown in the Encyclopedia Judaica (Vol. 6,
p.1419), Jews made many kinds of festive khale shapes, one for each
type of occasion and holiday.  Although the braided style is common,
unbraided was as likely to be found.  According to my mother, the
older women in her town knew how to braid khale, and those that
didn't, e.g., her own mother, didn't braid.  The braided styling of
khale may or may not have been inspired by the pagan goddess, but
the tradition of eating khale on Shabbes was most probably not,
since braiding does not seem to be a critical factor here.
Furthermore, Jews called a braided khale "a geflokhtene khale" not
"a getsopte khale" as far as I know (the Atlas finding can tell us
more), and so the "hollentsopf" connection doesn't seem to be so
strong here.  Other folks probably also made braided breads.

        Thirdly, just because this kind of bread has Slavic
nomenclature, does not necessarily mean that its original source is
non-Jewish.  It only connotes Slavic geographical origin.  Let's not
fail to mention that a Slavic `kolatsh' is always round with a large
hole in the middle (usually where candles are placed), hence its
etymological source meaning `circle' or `wheel'; and a Jewish
braided koyletsh is almost always long and there is never ever a
whole in the middle.  (The Jewish wedding koyletsh with which one
dances in front of the bride and groom after the khupe has small
candles set into the khale and no holes are made.  I had such a
khale at my own wedding but I am sorry I can't remember its name
right now).  Several scenarios to explain the origin of koyletsh are
possible: a) Braided and/or round festive bread called `kolatsh'
arose among the Slavs and these became so popular among Jews that it
even extended into Germanic territory; b) Round and/or braided
festive breads arose among Jews in Slavic territory and they
selected a co-territorial term to distinguish khales made in this
style from those of other styles and these became popular among the
Slavs; or c) Jews created this new style and the Slavs named the new
item, but among Jews, it seems, koyletsh either always was or became
interchangeable with the generic term khale which can mean any style
of a festive Jewish bread.

        That Jews invented round and/or braided khale is quite
possible because a) the Slavic terms `kolatsh' and its variant
`kalatsh' are found in heavily populated Jewish territories; b) the
Slavic `kolatch' is akin to the many round types of khales we know
Jews baked; and c) the round braided `kolatsh' is the only such
bread known in this territory as far as I know. If anyone knows of
others I would love to know.  (Its called "karovey" if it's used at
a wedding.)  Since the Slavic term `kolatsh', according to an
etymological dictionary, denotes not a generic festive bread which
is what Wexler's comments imply, but rather, only a round, braided
type of festive bread, the possibility that Jews learned of khale
from non-Jews is most unlikely.  As we see from the case of Polish
and Ukrainian papercuts, which are so famous all over the world, so
much more so than Jewish ones, the Poles usually attribute their
origin to Polish genius.  But if one delves into the academic
literature, one finds that Polish experts clearly state that this
very popular Polish craft was learned from Jews in about the
1840-1850 in such and such areas.  The same may be for `kolatsh'.

      The basic problem here, I think, is that Wexler doesn't
understand the nature and process of cultural borrowing and makes
historical statements on the basis of the existence of such a small
lexical inventory, each of which has multiple explanations.
Weinreich did not conclude that Germanic Jewry came from Italy
solely on the basis of the existence of leynen, bentshn,
shprintse,etc.  The basis for his "assertion" as I remember is the
fact that the earliest Jewish grave markings have "Italianate" names
on the headstones.  Then he let his lexical findings steer/confirm
his theoretical direction.  In my book, you don't conclude that Jews
came from French territory into Germany just on the basis of the
French-source term "tsholent" among Germanic Jews.  You must have
historical/archaeological evidence to confirm your theory which
Wexler admits he doesn't have.  Look at the American material
culture that is voluntarily sought out abroad (as distinguished by
what is commercially exported).  Its jeans, records and hamburgers.
Foods, clothing, music are always the first candidates in cultural
exchanges and the easiest inter-cultural travelers.  The same goes
for Wexler's other citations, `blintses' and `traybern'-- all being
technical innovations in the above categories.  My own work shows me
that technical innovations generate new terminology both inter- and
intra-culturally.  Why `traybern' was an innovation, I explained in
my previous posting.

      One of the things that Wexler doesn't understand is the
symbolic inversion that happens in cultural exchange which leads him
to seek and accept implausible historical explanations.  When a
hasid heard a military tune of a marching army band and weaved out
of it a hasidic nign, it meant that in his head, he can take any
beautiful thing out there, internalize it, Judaize it, invert it
with what is for him a new Jewish meaning and association and,
voila, you now have a new Jewish song.  What we have here is the
equivalent of someone coming centuries later and saying that the
composer of this Jewish nign must have been a ger who knew this song
and tried to Judaize it.  Going along with this kind of thinking,
someone can come and claim that European Jewry are all Christian
converts because look, the chief song of Khanuka "Maoz Tsur" is
really an old Christian church hymn (which it is).  And we will all
say, so what if it originally was?   Today in Boro Park, Flatbush,
Williamsburg a great many orthodox Jews buy Christmas decorations to
decorate their sukkas.  This may astound you as it first did me.
When my fellow ethnographer once asked a hasidic woman how she can
disassociate the Christian symbolism from the article or disregard
the clear marking on the packaging that says "for Christmas",  the
woman easily explained how she works it out.  But future Wexlers
will probably come and say that many Christians who lived in
Brooklyn converted during the late 20th century.  How else can they
explain religious Jews buying such unadulterated `tume' as Christmas
decorations and hanging them up yet?

      I wonder if the French also think that they are of Slavic
stock since their crepes so resemble blintses.  Furthermore, if
Wexler's right, European Jews, who built Israel, have no right to be
in the land and should return to the Caucasus.

      And Bob, even if the Kalif- in my name were to come from
Arabic sources, it wouldn't advance Wexler's theory one millimeter.
And anyway, remember, Arabic is Semitic, something I and everyone
else always considered my dark features to be.

Genug shoyn, I am going to make dinner.

Reyzl Kalifowicz-Waletzky

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 3.048

