
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 6.110
November 28, 1996

1) Sholem Aleykhem un mameloshn (Bernard Katz)
2) _Der Groyser Verterbukh_ (Leybl Botvinik)
3) The survival of Yiddish (Mechel Asheri)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 27 Nov 1996 18:18:21 -0500 (EST)
From: bkatz@uoguelph.ca
Subject: Sholem Aleykhem un mameloshn

In Mendele 6.107, Louis Fridhandler noted Sholem Aleykhem's request and
indeed his own use of Hebrew in correspondence, as exemplifying a time
when he was not yet a Yiddishist.  It is worth noting in this regard,
that Sholem Aleykhem, even much later in his too short life, did not use
Yiddish among family members.  Having heard Belle Kaufman (now 85 and
likely the last person on earth who can remember him and his voice)
speak about her zeyde at the Jewish Book Fair in Toronto about two weeks
ago, I was very surprised to learn that he did not speak Yiddish in the
house, nor did his children, and that she had to learn Yiddish after
coming to the United States with her parents (by which time her zeyde
had already passed away). The language spoken in the home was always
Russian, she said.

Perhaps other Mendelayers, more knowledgable of these matters would
comment?

Bernard Katz

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 28 Nov 1996 15:29:41 +0200 (IST)
From: leybl@telecomm.tadiran.co.il
Subject: _Der Groyser Verterbukh_

[ikh hob di vokh nit keyn tsayt dos ibertsuzetsn oyf yidish, un
kumendike vokh vel ikh kimat nit hobn keyn tsutrit tsum internets, iz
gib ikh aykh dos iber nor inem englishn original. mirtseshem, vel ikh
iberakhtog dos iberzetsn oyf mame-loshn .  leybl botvinik]

              The Great Yiddish Dictionary
             ------------------------------

Lovers of Yiddish will remember with nostalgia the days when the late
Yudl Mark "raised heaven and earth" to implement his ambitious project
of producing the Great Yiddish Dictionary, which was designed to contain
some 12 volumes of Yiddish words, current in all countries and provinces
where Yiddish was a living, spoken language of the masses of the Jews,
as well as a literary language of poets and writers.

Yudl Mark and his hundreds of volunteers and associates, collected
thousands of Yiddish expressions, current in hundreds of Jewish
communities and managed to publish the first four volumes of the
Dictionary, containing all vowels starting with the letter Aleph.

The aim of Yudl Mark and his numerous friends, was to create a Treasury
of Yiddish, modeled on the famous Oxford Dictionary and other similar
encyclopedia and scientific dictionaries of highly developed langauges.
Unfortunately, he died in 1975, leaving the continuation of the task to
the Hebrew University of Jerusalem.

The late President of the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Mr. Avraham
Harman, was a great admirer of Yiddish culture in all its
manifestations. Soon after the death of Yudl Mark he assembled a group
of scholars headed by Prof. Wolf Moscowitz, Mr Shoil Ferdman and Dr.
Joseph Gouri of Jerusalem, who cooperated with Prof. Michael Herzog of
the Columbia University in New York, allocated space and facilities, so
that they could continuethe project. They worked for some 8 years,
composing the entries for letters Beth-Gimmel-Dalet-Heh-Vav-Zayin-Chet
and Tet -- which will make up the next 3 volumes of the to the
Dictionary.  All this material is almost ready for print, and the
responsibility for putting the final touches and for writing the
introduction will eagerly be undertaken by scholars at the Hebrew
University.

It has been estimated, that it will take a year for each volume to
appear in print -- provided, that the necessary funding will be
available. It will be remembered, that in addition to the contribution
that Yudl Mark obtained, he was greatly aided by several bequests which
lovers of Yiddish had made for this unique project.

After Abe Harman's retirement and subsequent death, the project was
dormant for several years. Recently, however, a group of "lovers of
Yiddish" in Jerusalem has undertaken to go on with the job. A Committee
is already in formation, which will include well known scholars of
Yiddish in Israel and elsewhere.

When Dr. Barnett Zumoff recently visited Israel with a group of members
of the "Arbeter Ring", he met with Mr. Sinai Leichter who described to
him the state of the project and the steps to be taken for its
continuation and hopefully, its completion. Dr. Zumoff showed great
enthusiasm and keen interest.

The Committee is hopeful, that "lovers of Yidish" will respond with
equal interest and practiced support, not only for the publication of
the available 3 volumes, but also for the eventual completion of the
Great Yiddish Dictionary.

For more info: S. Leichter, Shderot Herzl 88/A(-aleph), Jerusalem 96347,
Israel

Sinai Leichter
Jerusalem

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 28 Nov 1996 17:38:42 +0200
From: donnom@netvision.net.il
Subject: The survival of Yiddish

I would like to thank Dovid Braun for his kind comments [6.106], but
must take exception to his statement that "...we may abandon the notion
that ...before the Holocaust Jewish communities were, if not
hermetically sealed off from the world of the non-Jews so close to it as
made little difference". He cites the fact that "some of the Khsidim (I)
mentioned speak to each other in Hungarian (while living in 1966 in New
York or Israel -- not Satmer (sic), Ihel, Siget (sic) or Klouznborg
(sic) indicates just how invalid the "hermetically sealed" metaphor is".

Dovid Braun could not have chosen more unhappy examples than these. The
fact that these Jews speak Hungarian is a unique case in the
ultra-Orthodox world. Dell Hymes has pointed out (based on the work of
others) that the Western Yiddish that accompanied the first Jewish
immigrants to Eastern Europe was subject to "a specific form of language
synthesis in Slavic surroundings..In Hungary the situation was more
complex, and after German lost its role as a model it was not reshaped
on Hungarian models (as happened in Slavic surroundings), but replaced
by Hungarian".

In other words, Hungarian occupied the place that Yiddish did in other
Eastern European countries and the fact that it was spoken by the Jews
in Transylvania, Sub-Carpathia and Slovakia is no indication at all that
their communities were less isolated from the non-Jews in every sense
but the linguistic one than those of Poland, the Ukraine etc. It is not
to be wondered at that Hungarian has continued to occupy that place in
New York and Israel(and a good many other places). I cannot imagine a
more hermetically sealed set of communites (including the  linguistic
sense, since while English or Hebrew is the local vernacular, it is only
the Jews who speak Hungarian) than  those of Szatmar, Sziget, Kloiznberg
etc. in New York and Israel.

Bnei Brak, for example, is a place in which one can live, as I did, for
six years and never exchange three words with a goy. A famous story
tells of a man in Bnei Brak who, when asked if he spoke Hungarian,
answered apologetically, "No; I'm an oleh khadash (new immigrant)".

As far as that goes, the cultural isolation of the shtetl yidn outside
the Hungarian-speaking area never extended to language since contact
with the umos ho-oilom was unavoidable. Certainly Mezbizh (Miedziborz),
the home of the Baal-Shem-Tov was a completely self contained community,
yet we find in the book "Khal Khasidim v'Shivkhei Baal Shem Tov" a story
concerning the Baal Shem Tov's daughter Hodel, who was unable to have
children. She cried to her father that he should bless her and the Baal
Shem Tov told her, "zorg nit, mayn tokhter, du vest geholfn vern durkh
eyner fun mayne talmidim".

In effect, on Simchas Toyre, one of his talmidim was dancing so joyously
that his slipper flew off his foot and through the window. "Hot er
gegebn a geshray tzum besh"t's tokhter, oyf goyish: Hodel, padavay minie
batinki, to budish miet dotinku' (Hodel, gib mir di pantofl, vestu hobn
a kind).

Hodel looked outside for the slipper and, not being able to find it,
took the slippers off her own feet and gave them to him. The talmid
said: "Dayot dvie batinki, miet dva detinka (host gebrakht tzvey
pantofl, vestu hobn tzvey kinder)"

Here we see clearly that the language of the goyim was by no means
unknown or even unused by the Jews, but their isolation from the goyim
in every other sense was near absolute. It should not be thought that
the occasional use of the non-Jewish vernacular had any effect on the
daily use of Yiddish, always with the exception of Hungarian. As a
matter of fact, the late Szatmarer Rebbe is reported to have said when
asked if he spoke Hungarian (which he certainly must have), "Neyn: ikh
hob nokh nisht gelernt Idish".

The fact is that to this day in such places as Szatmar (Satu-Mare) and
Kloiznberg (Kluj), the language of the gentiles is largely Rumanian.
Jews speak it as well, but among themselves speak Hungarian. The same
applies to Arad, Nagyvarad, etc.

If it is of any interest, Szatmar and Sziget are in effect joined today
since with the death without heirs of the late Szatmarer Rebbe, his
nephew., the Szigeter replaced him. In addition, the Kloiznberger Rebbe
has for many years been known as the Tzantzer Rebbe and what were
formerly caled Kloiznberger Khsidim are now called (and call thenselves)
Tzantzer Khisidim. It is worth noting that that the Tzantzer is a cousin
(I believe a first cousin) of the Bobover Rebbe, who does not speak
Hungarian any more than the Tzantzer speaks Polish.

Mechel Asheri

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 6.110

