
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 4.108
September 21, 1994

1) Dutch Yiddish (Meyshe-Yankl Sweet)
2) Kibosh vs. kibush (Zev bar-Lev)
3) Romanization (Yude Rozof)
4) On Zellig's strictures (Shleyme Axelrod)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 19 Sep 94 03:46:32 CST
From: msweet@facstaff.wisc.edu
Subject: Dutch Yiddish

Interesting article in a recent Forverts, by Dovid Katz, about the Dutch
Jewish linguist Hartog Beem, whom I've seen mentioned before on this
list. Are there any Batavo-yiddishists who know if Beem's books are
available anywhere?  Especially his large lexicon "Yeroshe".  Are there
any Judaica bookstores in the Netherlands that might have this?

Meyshe-Yankl Sweet

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 20 Sep 94 11:59:18 PDT
From: zbarlev@zeus.sdsu.edu
Subject: kibosh vs. kibush and transliterating hebrew words in yiddish

1. objection!  it takes more than a meaning connection (or even meaning
identity) to establish an etymological link.  there's got to be a path
for it to take.  i have no special point of view of my own here, not
remembering the earlier discussion.  but how and when did /kibush/
supposedly enter English?

there are all sorts of books out there (altho not as many as in the 18th
century), in which someone "proves" that one language (often hebrew, but
often the author's native language, e.g. there is a 20th century exmaple
of arabic and an 18th century example of dutch) is the source of all
languages.  doesn't "source" come from hebrew shoresh?  i'm not accusing
charles eisenberg of going so far, but his QED is overstated.

2. i second the idea that it's ok to transliterate (not transcribe
phonemically) hebrew words in yiddish.  linguists may often prefer
phonemic transcription, but there's nothing illegitimate about a
transliteration. (there very handy in libraries, for example.)  if
"standard yiddish" wants to abolish such special spellings, it had better
abolish the special spellings in yiddish (a la sovietish heimlant).

zev bar-Lev

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 20 Sep 1994 12:16:51 -0400 (EDT)
From: jrosof@sas.upenn.edu
Subject: response to Aharon Meytahl re: romanization

In the last installment of Mendele Aharon Meytahl sharply criticized the
principle which I expressed, that Yiddish should be romanized in
approximate accordance with pronunciation.  I reproduce here a portion of
that letter: "...[Yude Rozof says...] Since in Yiddish there is no
difference between 'heth' and 'khav' (sic) the transliteration should
have the same sign for both of them.  I fail to follow the logic."  The
letter goes on to explain a far more "logical" system of transliteration:
letter by letter.

In fact as I shall demonstrate, such a system would lead to hefkeyres.
This can be easily realized by comparison with the difficulties involved
in writing English in Yiddish:  "high school" is written in Yiddish
characters as "Hay skul" and not as "high skhul."  How should the Yiddish
reader of English, unfamiliar with the finer points of English spelling
discern between the "gh" in high, enough, and weight? In order to know
how to read English thus transliterated into his language, the Yiddish
reader would have to already be familiar with the whole English language
and spelling system, in which case he would be better served to read the
transliterated text in the original.

Transliteration is only as helpful as its ability to communicate the
reproduction of the spoken sentence graphically produced. To return to
the problems of Yiddish romanization, we are faced by the fact that the
same letters in Yiddish can have a two fold pronunciation.  Thus the
9ayin could represent either an ancient Semitic gutteral consonant or the
vowel e in the literary dialect.  The kaph could represent either a /k/
or could follow the laws of begedkepet-bheghedhkhepheth, and be
pronounced as a khaph.  The yodh (Yiddish yud) is sometimes a vowel and
sometimes a consonant.  The Hebrew waw represents in Yiddish a /v/ or a
/u/.  It is ridiculous to consider transliterating the Yiddish "Mame
lebn, gib mir epes broyt, zay azoy gut" as /m@m9 l9bn gyb myr @9p9s brwyt
zyy azwy gwt./  Yet this is what uniformity demands if we are to assign
the same transliteration to yiddish letters in all words irrespective of
origin.

Aharon Meytahl justifies his transliteration scheme by claiming that it
gives more information to the reader.  Does it really?  To someone who
knows no English spelling, what good is "high" transliterated letter for
letter: the reader is deprived of the most basic information: how to read
the foreign word.  He is not interested in the fact that in ancient
English the gh represented a gutteral.  If he is a linguist and he is
interested, than he ought to study English in its own alphabet.

Thus to recap: letter for letter transliteration is not practical in
Yiddish, a language with multiple pronunciations of some letters and
merged pronunciations of others.  Secondly, even if one does
transliterate letter for letter, which values does one assign to the
letters of the Hebrew alphabet? Modern Hebrew is not generally romanized
according to reconstructed Masorite pronunciation.  One writes echad,
rather than 'eh.odh in most situations.  Should Yiddish outdo Hebrew and
write ma@ribh for mayrev? Or maybe even magharibh (the Biblical
pronunciation reconstructed by linguistics).  I think not.  The Hebrew
alphabet should serve Yiddish, Yiddish should not serve the Hebrew
alpahbet.

Aharon Meytahl is further convinced that those who disagree with his view
are khas-vekholile anti-hebreistn: "I suspect it has to do with the old,
now defunct struggle, with Hebrew.  As a matter of principle, everything
that smells of Hebrew should be oyfgekert or God forbid the use of Hebrew
words davke azoy."  Punkt farkert Reb Arn! 'Eineni klal ve-klal mitnaged
la-9ivrit ha-hidusha asher hitkayema beyameinu 9al adamatam shel
ha-yehudim. Barukh hashem, she-teileikh ve-tigdal beli 9ayn ha ra9. 'Ani
9as.mi ohev gadol shel ha-safa ve-ka9eit ani mit9aseiq  be-lemidat
sifruta shel ha-9ivrit ba-mikhlala.

I would say that in the Kulturkampf between modern Hebrew and Yiddish,
Yiddish was the true victim.  The Zionist movement in British Mandatory
Palestine and later the State of Israel went out of their way to hammer
the nails into the coffin of Yiddish, and Yiddish printing presses were
faced with terrorist threats. Never did Yiddishists turn on loshn-koydesh
with such venom.  To this day, flyers on El-Al may read any of a host of
Israeli papers printed in foreign languages in Israel in German,
Hungarian, Russian, Polish, etc. Yiddish, represented in Israel by a
variety of regularly appearing periodicals, is conspicuous by its
absence.  Whether in Hebrew or Yiddish, all I seek is koved ha-loshn,
kbhwd hlshwn.

Yude Rozof

4)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 20 Sep 1994 13:08:30 -0400 (EDT)
From: PTYAXEL@ubvms.cc.buffalo.edu
Subject: On Zellig's strictures:  Toward a case for inclusiveness

Shoymer-yidish Zellig Bach (4.102) offers a counsel of perfection:
Romanize (transcribe) into English according to the "strict and
long-accepted rules of Yiddish spelling."  The advice is reminiscent of
Roman Jakobson's dictum in his preface to Weinreich's _College Yiddish_:
"Full mastery or illiteracy-- _tertium non datur_."

So who can argue with "Do it right"?  But even if we grant that the YIVO
conventions (rather "young", as ellen prince [4.104] notes) ought to be
followed in serious scholarly and literary efforts, we should face up to
the nature of Mendele in the real cyberworld.  An inquiry last week
revealed that there were 534 subscribers.  It's anyone's guess what
proportion both know the YIVO conventions of Yiddish spelling and are
able to romanize in YIVO style easily; but judging from the last couple
of years worth of issues, if "Do it right" entails "or don't do it at
all", then there will be many who will be turned off and away from
Mendele--a saddening prospect.  Why not acknowledge that there are at
least two groups of Mendelenikes, those who can without great effort
follow Zellig's counsel, and those who haven't learned to do so and don't
have the training, the time, or the energy to learn to do so? The second
group is surely more sizable than would be indicated by the almost
unanimous support Zellig's posting has so far received, and surely there
are many in the second group who, more intimidated than Bert Steinberg
was (4.104) by Zellig's post, have been too diffident to respond.  As
others have asked in past interchanges on the topic, Is the number of
lovers of Yiddish these days so great that we can afford to dismiss a
whole group for non-compliance with orthographic, grammatical, and
transcriptional norms?  Why can't we have it both ways, Group 1 striving
toward functioning as a learned society, the members of Group 2 enjoying
Mendele for their own less scholarly and less technical reasons?

(Zellig's fight with the U.S. Census Bureau, now--that's a different
story; the passage from the Bureau's Yiddish "Guide" for interviewers
that he reproduces in Afn Shvel (No. 292, Oct.-Dec. 1993) is indeed
outrageous.  The difference is that the Bureau certainly had the
resources to assess the correctness of its Yiddish, resources that an
individual Mendelenik, deriving pleasure from the language however
imperfectly remembered from his/her youth, does not have.)

I recall reading with pleasure many years ago an account of young people
--Yugntrufnikes, I suppose--picketing the Forverts building, carrying
signs demanding "Derekh-erets far yidish!"  But what it is reasonable to
demand of the then-daily major Yiddish newpaper in the U.S. (and the U.S.
Census Bureau) may be too much to ask of individuals who want to maintain
a connection, however tenuous, with a cherished part of their early lives
that included Yiddish as an important element.  Where else can they go?
Mendele is after all not Di yidishe shprakh or Afn shvel or Di goldene
keyt; by their nature, electronic lists are informal, even ephemeral
(though thanks to Noyekh Shames and Bob Rothstein, archives of Mendele
are now available to those who want to refer to them.)  Let's not drive
anyone away.

Let two flowers bloom.

Shleyme Axelrod

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 4.108

Mendele has 2 rules:

	1. Provide a meaningful Subject: line
	2. Sign your article (full name please)

A Table of Contents is now available via anonymous ftp, along with weekly
updates.

Anonymous ftp archives available on:
          ftp.mendele.trincoll.edu
          in the directory pub/mendele/files

Archives available via gopher on:
        gopher.cic.net

Send articles to:
        mendele@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

Other business:
        nmiller@mail.trincoll.edu


