
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 5.137
October 11, 1995

1) Exclusive interview in Yiddish with Colin Powell (Zellig Bach)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 8 Oct 1995 21:58:21 -0400
From: zellig@aol.com
Subject: Exclusive interview in Yiddish with Colin Powell

_Peysekhl der Shabes-GOYtshik_

First I heard on television that Colin Powell speaks Yiddish.  Then I
read it in the New York _Times_, in its Week in Review section (9/24/95,
p. 13), in an article on the Op-Ed page.  And then I read in the
English-language _Forward_ (pp. 1 and 2) the news story "A Bisl Yiddish
Could Go Far If Powell Takes the Stump" [for a presidential run].

In the old days, when fire engines used to run on _actual_ horse power
(not on horse power in cars), the horses in the firehouse would suddenly
come to life all aquiver at the first bell of an alarm.  So did the old
journalist in me sense a scoop, and I immediately called the general's
office for an appointment.

A male secretary answered.  "And what media do you represent, Sir?" I
hesitated for a moment, not being certain how to answer.  I knew, of
course, that _Memdele_ is a "medium," attracting many lurkers before they
"out" themselves with an introduction...  but a "Media"?  So I fudged my
answer:

"I'm a frequent free-lance contributor to Mendele..."

"Mendele who?"

"The Grandfather of..."

"The 'grandfather' you said? The General, as you certainly know, is all
for _family values_, so he will be glad to see you...  Let me check his
schedule... How about Wednesday, October 4, at 14 hours?" [military time
-- ZB].

"Sorry,  I couldn't make it, it is Yom Kippur, a very High Holiday...
I'm sure the General will understand since, as a young boy in the Hunts
Point section of the South Bronx, he was employed in an orthodox
synagogue where on Friday nights he would turn the lights on and off, for
which services he earned a quarter..."

"Yes, Sir, I read it in his book... How about the following Monday,
October 9, at 16 hours?" [4:00 P.M. civilian time -- ZB].

On the day of the appointment I was ready with all my questions
formulated in my mind.  I carried a clean, fresh handkerchief and wore,
you will excuse me -- whole socks.  This was according to lifelong
admonitions by my mother, o"h:  "When going visiting, always carry a
fresh handkerchief and wear whole socks, because, God forbid,  if you are
suddenly taken to the hospital and undressed, lo and behold -- holes in
the socks..."  The second part of this admonition was radically different
for my sisters:  "... Always wear clean underwear because, khas
vekholile, you are suddenly taken to the hospital and undressed, lo and
behold -- dirty underwear..."

I arrived for my appointment ten minutes early, and was escorted by an
aide to one of the General's offices in his splendid house in McLean,
Virginia. The oak floor and red leather Queen Anne chair lent it an air
of formality. On one wall were displayed assorted Medals of Honor he
received throughout his distinguished career.  On the wall opposite his
chair was a vertical row of framed photographs of the Presidents he
served, Reagan, Bush, Clinton.  On a small side wall, an enlarged framed
picture of the ticker-tape parade down Fifth Avenue following Desert
Storm.

The General greeted me with a firm handshake.  I expected his erect
military bearing, but was pleasantly surprised by his warm smile and soft
twinkle in his eyes.

The Interview:

ZB   Vos hobn ayere khaveyrim aykh gerufn ven ir hot gevoynt in dorem
Bronx?

CP   Peysekhke, min hastam far mayn nomen Powell.  Eyn mol hob ikh
gefregt dem rov fun der shul vu kh'hob ge'arbet etlekhe yor yedn fraytik
tsunakhts, vos volt geven mayn nomen in idish far Colin?  Kh'gedenk nit
dem nomen vos er hot mir gezogt, ober es hot geklungen vi 'columnist'...

ZB   Ir meynt efsher 'Kloynimus'?  Dos iz an alter nomen, kumt fun
Grikhish un meynt a "sheyner nomen."  Fun Grikhish iz es arayngegangen in
Aramish, un dan in Hebreyish un Yiddish.  Hayntike tsaytn ober vert es
zeltn genutst. "Peysekhke" fun der ander zayt iz a zeyer sheyner un
farshpreyter nomen, kumt fun wort "peysakh," dem groysn yontef fun
frayhayt, ven di yidn zaynen antlofn fun Mitsrayim, Egypt, vu zey zaynen
geven shklafn...  Vi men zingt inem shpiritsuel "Let my people go..."

CP   Zeyer interesant...  Ir zent a litvak?

ZB   Yo! fun vanen veyst ir?

CP   Kh'her dokh vi ir redt...  In indzer neighborhood zanen maysnts idn
geven rumenishe un ingerishe...  Vi zogt men 'neighborhood' af idish?

ZB   Gegnt.

CP   Yo, ta'ke, gegnt, itster dermon ikh zikh...  Kh'farshtey az di
mitglider in "Mendele" zanen kemfers far idish.  Ver iz ayer hoypt
general? [he said it with a hard /g/]

ZB   Er iz a pensyonirter profesor fun sotsiologye, a zeyer basheydener
mentsh, un er bashteyt deroyf men zol im rufn shames...

CP:  Shames gor?...  Kh'gedenk dem shames fun der shul vu kh'fleg arbetn
fraytik tsunakhts... a sheyner, varemer mentsh... Er flegt mir rufn
"Peysekhl, der shabes-GOYtshik"  (laughs)... Vi gefelt aykh aza nomen?

ZB   Zeyer gerotn un tsugepast...  Kh'hob gehert az ven ir zayt geven in
Yisroel, hot ir un Shamir, der demolstiker premyer, ongefirt a langen
shmu'es ingantsn in Yiddish...

CP   (Laughs heartily, and his eyes are all atwinkle)   An oysgetrakhte
maynse... fun onheyb bizn sof on a vort emes!...  Di   maynse iz poshet
geven tsu sheyn, khotsh an oysgetrakhte, es optsuleykenen...  Iz zayt ir
der ershter journalist, fun Mendele, vemen ikh zog oys dem sod az di
gantse geshikhte iz geven nit gestoygn, nit gefloygn... (looks at his
watch.) Kh'bin zikher az ir hot a tuts oder mer vikhtike frages, un
kh'vel aykh muzn zen nokh a mol far a tsveytn shmu'es fun etlekhe sho
tsayt.  Iz vet ir mir, kh'bet aykh, antshuldikn farn hayntikn kurtsn
intervyu...  Ir hot mir farshaft groys fargenign, mir dermont mayne
sheyne kinderyorn, un opgefrisht mayn idish.  Iz muzt ir mit mir hobn a
farbays -- a glezele tey, mit lemon, hart tsuker, un a kikhl...  [The
General pressed a button on the telephone, and said on the intercom:
'Please bring me two set-ups of tea with lemon, some dry, flat cookies,
and cubes of sugar, not the powder sugar.']

We got up and exchanged some pleasantries.  An aide brought in a tray
with the requested assortment, including sugar cubes.  I enjoyed the
snack very much.

I genuinely thanked the General for his time and ready accessibility, and
congratulated him on his fluency in Yiddish after so many years.  As can
clearly be seen from this verbatim interview, he knows quite a lot more
than just a "bisl" Yiddish...

The following day I called his secretary for my second interview.  He
said: "It all depends.  If the General decides to run for President, his
time, naturally, will be extremely limited."

Now a thought began to obsess me:  Suppose next time Colin Peysekhke
Powell turns the table on me and asks _my_ advice whether to run or not
to run for the presidency.  What should I tell him?...   I'll discuss it,
of course, with our Noyekh, and I'm sure he will give me the politically
correct guidance...

Zellig Bach
Lakehurst, NJ

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 5.137

