
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 5.065
July 23, 1995

1) Origins of Yiddish (Mikhl Herzog)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 23 Jul 95  01:14 EDT
From: zogur@cuvmb.columbia.edu
Subject: Origins of Yiddish

1. Ellen Prince asks about Elye Bokher.

As I recall, Elye Bokher was born after the middle of the 15th century
(1460-1470, or thereabouts), in Ipsheim/Uepscheim, near Nuremberg, lived
off and on in Padua, Germany, and Venice, published the _Bovo-bukh_ and
other works in Isny/Isna? in 1541. The _Bovo-bukh_ had been completed
several decades before it was published. Uniquely, it includes a glossary
of several dozen (Judeo-?)Italian words, in Yiddish letters, (including,
as I recall, _matrats_'a bet oys vol gemakht', _putana_ 'a zoyne', etc.).

Judah Joffe's introduction to the facsimile edition of the _Bovo- bukh_
which YIVO published, implies that the author suffered the vicissitudes
of the Jewish communities of the towns in which he lived, albeit enjoying
protection from some of the big boys whom he instructed in Hebrew.

Max Weinreich may say more about him in his Shtaplen article on the 16th
century (Dovid Goldberg, please!), and there may be still more in
Tsinberg's _Di geshikhte fun der literatur bay yidn_.

2. On Jews and German in Italy, and the age of Yiddish:

Weinreich posits a direct connection between Jews in Northern Italy and
the Rhineland ("Loter") as early as the 8th century. Ellen's suggestion
that German was being spoken in Northern Italy even then, as it still is
today, may be right on the mark. As for later, we know that whole
communities of Jews had moved from Germany to Italy during the period of
the Black Death-- Yiddish speaking, I would say, not German-speaking--and
16th century Italy was the center of what's been called "the blossoming
of Yiddish literature".

But even the earlier contact between Jews from Northern Italy and Loter
needn't have provided the setting for the first contact between the Jews
and German. Ellen speaks of Yiddish "predating" the arrival of the Jews
in Germany. It surely depends on what we consider the latter date to have
been. Jews came to Germany, if not before then at least as early as the
Romans in Old High German times, with what consequences for the history
of Yiddish, we scarcely know. With some, possibly! They disappear from
the German record, if not from Germany, together with the Romans, in the
middle of the 5th century.

Weinreich doesn't bring them *to* Germany from Romance lands; he brings
them *back to* Germany from Northern France and Northern Italy about 400
years later at which time he posits the confluence of necessary
conditions for the emergence of Yiddish. I've always been inclined to
look to earlier periods on the assumption that Ellen now shares that Jews
weren't mute the day before they began to speak Yiddish.

If the posited historical facts are not at issue, once the Jews do
reemerge on German territory, we certainly have conditions ripe for the
admixture of Semitic, Germanic, and Romance components we call Yiddish
which, like every language, must be understood as having behind it an
infinite series of earlier and earlier stages (Who am I quoting?). The
decision to give the language a distinct name at a particular time surely
has more to do with socio-cultural factors than linguistic ones. Once we
do so name it, we incorporate into its history all those underlying
earlier and earlier stages, _evne_ if some of those stages function
equally in the history of a related language.

I wonder if Weinreich wasn't more interested in establishing the
necessary "sociolinguistic" conditions for the emergence of the language,
than anything too much more precise? In any event, he relied on more than
the "s"-plural and on the well-known listable handful of Romance-origin
words in Yiddish. The Romance evidence he adduces includes the Romance
place-names in Jewish documents with which Jews designated the Rhine and
the Rhineland towns: Rhinus, Ashpira, Magentsa, Germaize, Treves and not
Rhine, Speyer, Mainz, Worms, Trier; and a number of proper names that go
beyond the (in)famous _yentl/yente_: Shneyer, Fayvush, Faytl. Still, the
corpus is small, to be sure.

3. On trying to understand the errors of Weinreich's ways:

During the past 15 years or so, the Young Turks who have challenged the
received Weinreichian view have added some excitemen to life in our
little _shtibl_/_klayzl_. Bob King and Alice Faber's "Bavarian
hypothesis", Dovid Katz's "Aramaic hypothesis" and, yes, Paul Wexler's
"Sorbian hypothesis". Each hypothesis is advanced with considerable
confidence in its truth value. Can all of them be true?

Concerning the Bavarian hypothesis, would Alice or Bob venture an opinion
as to how Max Weinreich could have been so wrong? Didn't he know German
dialectology? He did! Did he simply ignore the linguistic features that
Yiddish can so easily be shown to share with Bavarian German? Shall we
assume that he was wearing ideological blinders?

For what it's worth in this context, in working on Volume III of the
Yiddish Atlas, I'm increasingly impressed by the surprising connections
that have emerged between features of Yiddish in Alsace (the French
Southeast/German Southwest) and Yiddish in the Carpathians and the
Ukraine, and sometimes neighboring Austria to the West, in contrast to
the large intervening area.

Are there any parallel connections on the German map? I'm relatively
ignorant of the details of German dialectology. Does Bavarian German
share features with German in the southwest German lands? Does Yiddish
share any of these features with them? What features does Yiddish share
exclusively with Bavarian German? Do we have evidence for the geographic
distribution of these features in German at earlier times? Do the answers
to these questions concern you?

4. On Reading Weinreich's "History":

If you've only read the English translation of Weinreich's _History of
the Yiddish Language_, hear this: Weinreich's _Geshikhte_ is a
four-volume work. Two volumes of text which have been translated and
published; and two volumes of parallel notes, explications and
bibliography which have been translated but not published. The latter are
indispensible to any serious researcher, but the prospect that they will
ever be published is very slim indeed.

During his lifetime, Weinreich would not permit the publication of the
text alone. He insisted that the only ones who "needed" his work,
"needed" the notes and bibliography. His wishes were adhered to. Had the
question of an English translation arisen, he would surely have insisted
on the same conditions. Unfortunately, it did not.

There is a solution: The chief advantage of the English translation is
the excellent index prepared by Dr.Bella Haas Weinberg. (The Yiddish
original lacks an index.) One of its weaknesses, however, is that the
paragraph numbering in the translation does not correspond to the
paragraph numbering in the original. It is therefore impossible for a
reader to move easily between the English text and the Yiddish notes. I
know that someone (his name escapes me) did prepare a table of paragraph
number correspondences between the Yiddish and English editions. With
this in hand one _could_ move easily between the two. From the English
Index to the appropriate paragraph number to the corresponding paragraph
in the Yiddish "Notes". Perhaps YIVO could be induced to release this
table. On line? Zachary?

Mikhl Herzog

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 5.065

