
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 3.170
December 17, 1993

1) Daytchmerismen (Reyzl Kalifowicz-Waletzky)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu Dec 16 15:38:54 1993
From: Roslyn Kalifowicz-Waletzky <0005943838@mcimail.com>
Subject: Re: daytshmerizmen-- to Bob

        First of all, Bob, I knew you would give me an argument
about that posting and I am ready for you.   Most of the contents
below were written before my posting to Khaim (discussing specific
daytshmerizmen).  But, because I wanted to check on the biblio I
included below, I am sending it out 2 days later.   This posting
should have preceded the one to Khaim.

        Daytshmerizmen (I am not sure what the English equivalent
term is so I'll stick to the Yiddish one) are not all German words
with which Yiddish speakers came into contact from the late 19th
century onward.  Like all natural languages, Yiddish, whether
standard or not, is open to influence from all the languages with
which it comes into contact. Recently-coined terms borrowed from
another language, be it Russian, English, Polish or modern German,
enrich Yiddish when there is no native equivalent.

        When the Haskala movement in the late 19th and early 20th
century wanted to eradicate old Eastern European cultural and social
patterns, they knew they had to get that Jewry not only to read the
literature of the Enlightenment, which was largely in German, but
also destroy the language in which Yiddish culture operated.  Hence,
modern German vocabulary was inserted wholesale into Yiddish texts,
among other things, replacing associations with religion, folklore,
folk belief, etc.   The hope was that with this German vocabulary,
the reader would slowly and unconsciously learn German so that when
s/he came upon German literature, the ideas expressed there would be
more easily absorbed.  This German vocabulary was presented as more
sophisticated, esthetic, whole, and progressive than the bastardized
"zhargon" it was replacing.   As a result, hundreds of perfectly
good old Yiddish words, some as old as a thousand years, e.g., a
sakh, leyenen, which reflects so much history and Jewish linguistic
creativity (namely, the Jewish transformation of that Italian word),
were restricted at best or usually replaced by forced foreign ones
with little or no connection to Eastern European Jewish culture,
history or shprakh-gefil.  That is a great injustice to Yiddish.

        Yiddish lost a great deal and gained little.  If the new
terms didn't exist in Yiddish, then their addition was welcome, but
then, Yiddish linguists demanded that those go thru the linguistic
cooking process and conform to Yiddish linguistic patterns before
they could be fully accepted into the standard language.  The fact
is that thousands of daytshmerizmen have still not gone through this
natural process, even 100 years later.  I don't remember what the
count on this is, but I believe that of the many thousands, only
about 100-200 are still to be found in the speech of native Eastern
European Yiddish speakers (writing may be higher). Perhaps 20 or 30
of those have achieved a wide distribution.  (Counting the shvarts
pintelekh and drayiklekh in Weinreich will give us a more accurate
account.)  We aren't even talking about the widespread concomittant
campaign to thoroughly Germanize Yiddish spelling, e.g., inserting
heys and ayins to Yiddish words so that they look like their German
cognates, e.g., writing gheyn instead of geyn, zogEn, instead of
zogn, etc.  By  pushing Yiddish writing back to what it looked like
in the 1200s or 1400s, they were trying to de-evolve the language
and eradicate all the creative uniqueness of what made it a discrete
language of its own.  I guess the goal in that de-evolution was to
stregthen their claim that Yiddish was only a cant.  If you think
that the decline of Yiddish is not in part, or no longer, effected
by this movement, you are a naive linguist.

        The struggle against daytshmerizmen began in Europe and part
of any revival or maintenance of the language must include cleaning
up the toxic effects of this movement.  It must include it, because
when you look at the Zionist (and I am one) and Hebraist {I am also
a proud native speaker of Hebrew} arguments against Yiddish, you see
that they bought them at face value from  the Haskalaniks who in
turn completely bought into the German nationalists attitude
vis-a-vis Yiddish.  The misconceptions, simplifications, patronizing
of Yiddish, including from native Yiddish speakers themselves, are
still strewn all around "di Yiddishe gas" and I don't agree that
talking today against daytshmerizmen is like playing fiddle while
Rome burns.  The Hebraists took and disseminated both the German
anti-Semitic arguments againest Jews being a parasitic, non-creative
people  who not only warped the German they procured, but also the
arguments of the self-hating Jews againest "zhargon" to further
their own agenda in replacing Yiddish with Hebrew as THE Jewish
language of Ashkenazi Jews. (These guys were not concerning
themselves with Sephardim who were speaking Djeudezmo--their
diaspora Yiddish.)

        You can still see an example of the persistence of these
effects in the  ridiculous, ignorant statements made even as late as
yesterday about Yiddish from someone who not only reads Mendele but
even posts here quite often, Marnen Laibow-Koser.  Where in God's
name can someone come on here and say that the rules of Yiddish
grammar are "loose" just because they are unlike Latin's rules?  Or
just because you accept that the rules of Yiddish word order are
"looser" than the Berman's understanding of what Weinreich presented
in College Yiddish?  How in God's name can someone misconstrue this
point unless they come on Mendele with a whole bunch of convenient
misconceptions about Yiddish in 1993?  No one would dream of saying
that about any other modern language which I think/assume/hope every
one here agrees Yiddish is.  Such statements I believe reflect not
only laziness in learning Yiddish by its own rules, but are the
result of the lethal effects of the daytshmeristn's campaign and
later Zionist self-serving campaign against Yiddish. Having
sentimental feelings toward Yiddish or wanting Yiddish to survive
doesn't preclude you from having misconceptions about the language.
Anyway, the above is the basis for a large part of the argument
against daytshmerizmen, presented here afn shpits meser.

BTW, some of the Yiddishized German terminology are more successful
than others.   Some of these are for me personally more foreign than
the few daytshmerizms in my own family speech, e.g., I'll take the
word zelbstmord over aleyn-mord, etc.  Anyway, the overwhelming
majority was rejected because their use was superfluous and/or
affected and the Yiddish terms were deemed "good enough".  Others
have quite widely disseminated, like, onfangen, yetst, lezn, fil (=a
sakh), aynladn, etc. and have taken root in some circles.  The
arguments for e.g., onfangen and lezn, being accepted at this point
is that they have dialectal variants-- a sign of rootedness. But I
personally and many others still abhor them (why? next post).

        You feel that the daytshmerish clean-up job has gone to
extremes. When it comes to certain daytshmerizmen, I can see an
argument that some of these words should be considered synonyms of
the old Yiddish ones and hence they would reflect renewed contact
between German and Yiddish in the late 19th century.  I can accept
that if the old Yiddish terms are not only not discarded but allowed
to stay with their own koved.  Then of course the very goal of the
daytshmeristn would be thwarted.  It is their premise, judgments and
goals that is being fought when one rejects their linguistic cure of
a superfluous German corpus.  Gaining this terminological repertoire

as alternate equivalence to the existing Yiddish corpus IS NOT the
issue; it's the fatal arrogance and patronizing that motivates and
accompanies it that's the problem.  We, in monolingual America,
can't feel the danger of either German or old German attitudes today
but that's not so in Europe or Israel where German and German
thought is known by or has diffused among a greater proportion of
the population.  The German issue is definitely charged since the
Holocaust, but the fight against daytshmerizmen was fiercer in the
years preceding W.W.II. than after it.  No matter how daytshmerizmen
glittered to the poor Jews before W.W.II, today many of us
understand that "fil" isn't any more beautiful or superior to "a
sakh", and "virklikh" isn't prettier than the old word "emes", etc.
Perhaps the problem is not only that most of this generation today
doesn't feel the past or the remnant threat of German, as much as it
isn't aware of the shadow the attitudes and assumptions of the
daytshmeristn left on Yiddish. This shadow dealt a deathblow at the
same time that it stimulated in response a new vibrant Yiddish
literature.  I say deathblow because the image of Yiddish's
corruption and unwholeness vis-a-vis its German linguistic source is
what convinced Zionists of the early period to take the extreme
position that they did, namely, that only with the death of Yiddish
could Jews "recover" from their Eastern European culture.   For
those who can still see the source of that long shadow, the struggle
against daytshmerizmen is connected to the struggle of Yiddish for
respect as an independent, aesthetic language, viable for
sophisticated intellectuals.

        Even Ab. Cahan's plainly-stated goal in inserting so many
daytshmerizmen and later "angletsizmen" in the Forverts was for Jews
to assimilate so well that the Forverts would die off on its own.
Well, in a few years, he is going to achieve his dream.

        Another problem is that students who find daytshmerizmen in
old Yiddish texts, don't always know what to do or think about them.
I think that a historical perspective should be given, including how
we understand today this period in the history of Yiddish.

        As for your quote from Max Weinreich, I will point out his
article " written as early as 1938 "Daytshmerish Toyg Nisht" (in
Yiddish Far Ale, Vol. 1) as his position on this issue not the one
you quoted.  To better understand this issue and why its use is a
"baleydikung" to Yiddish (quote by Dorothy Bilik here), I suggest
some more bibliographical data of which I know about but never read.
There is also Kalmanovith's article "Der Shoyresh fun daytshmerish"
in Oyfn Shvel and in the original Yiddish Far Ale, 1938.  Others who
have written about this are S. Birnboym, Nokhum Shtif, Prilutsky, Z.
Reyzn, Zhitlovsky, Giniger, Aren Zeitlen, Opatoshu, Elberg, M.
Shafir, M. Schaechter among others.

Now I think I've said everything I had to say on this point.  Sorry
it was so long.  But I figure few people here heard the argument.

Reyzl Kalifowicz-Waletzky

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 3.170

Mendele has 2 rules:
	
	1. Provide a Subject: line.
	2. Sign your article.

Send submissions/responses to:

        mendele@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

Other business:

        nmiller@starbase.trincoll.edu

Anonymous ftp archives available on:

        ftp.mendele.trincoll.edu
        in the directory pub/mendele/files




