
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 3.233
February 13, 1994

1) Certain diseases among Jews (Dan Leeson)
2) Schindler's list (Ellen Prince)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri Feb 11 16:37:39 1994
From: leeson@cedar.fhda.edu
Subject: Certain diseases among Jews

I am an active participant in jewishgen which is a genealogic board
that specializes in people who search for Jewish ancestors.  I
mention this as a brief introduction to the fact that I have been
doing genealogic research of both my wife and my family for at least
25 years.

There are certain areas of Europe where the intermarriage rate was
so high (and for generations) that the presence of diseases
transmitted genetically with a higher incidence in the Jewish
population is not surprising.  Certain families would marry first
cousins to each other for more than 3 or 4 consecutive generations.
Thus, a disease such as Tay Sachs would have a much higher incidence
in such families than those who did not so intermarry.

I am not offering a criticism of the laws associated with
intermarriage, simply commenting on what appears to the average
genealogist specializing in Jewish ancestors as a likely cause.

In Alsace, for example, there were slightly more than 20,000 Jews at
the time that a census of Jews was taken in 1784.  It is almost
impossible to find a single descendent of that area who is not
related to any other descendent of that area at least 3 or more
ways.

The Guggenheim family of Lengnau, Switzerland intermarried with
cousins so frequently (and uncles married their nieces, though
Jewish law forbad an aunt to marry her nephew) that I am astonished
that a greater degree of medical defectiveness is NOT found in their
descendents.

In the Shtelts of eastern Europe, intermarriage was an inevitable
consequence of the social rules.  Marriage was by yichus as much as
anything else.  And the prestigiousness of one's genealogy was as
important to getting an appropriate match as anything else.  I know
of no culture that so arranged marital affairs in this way.  Thus,
one scholar would marry on the basis of his genelogy, have children,
and they often married only those who could match such genealogies.
And who were these people?  Relatives, of course.

So the fact that certain diseases are more common among Jews is not,
to the genealogist, a surprising turn of events.  It would be more
remarkable if it were the other way round.

One final point, if one starts with two parents, 4 grandparents, 8
great-grandparents, etc., within a short period of time, one gets to
a number that is greater than the number of Jews in the world at a
particular moment of history.  Thus, Jews, whose numbers have always
been small in contrast with other European cultures, are all related
to each other more recently than, say, the Christian culture.

It is an interesting and fascinating problem that is only now
getting untangled, but very slowly.

Dan Leeson

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sat Feb 12 12:27:01 1994
From: "Ellen F. Prince" <ellen@central.cis.upenn.edu>
Subject: schindler's list

to: daniella harpaz

i for one have no problem imagining that all sorts of survival
tactics took place in the holocaust. however, when a moviemaker
chooses to show a particular one, it often means something. and when
he shows the same one two or three times in the same movie, the
audience must infer that this was a particularly common occurrence,
right? the particular tactic that upset me in schindler's list was
not allowing other jews to hide in one's own hiding place. add to
that the fact that the well-documented eastern european camp guards
were entirely missing from the film, their roles being largely
filled by the very salient jewish kapos, and you wonder. and add to
that the absence of any sense of the (to my mind) amazing social
structure that existed in the ghettos and even death camps, with
classes for children and theatre groups and whatnot, and you wonder
some more. add to that the fact that 1/2 (1) of all the adults shown
trying to escape (2) is a woman who refuses to get into a sewer,
and... i believe it was spielberg's intention to show jews entirely
helpless without schindler, except of course for one shrewd
accountant acting apparently entirely on his own and in fact vastly
outnumbered by the jews who played right into the nazis' hands and
even did some of their dirty work.

one of the reasons that all this bothers me so is that he is clearly
aiming this movie at a public that knows nothing about the
holocaust, or else why would he have included the little lesson on
showers in auschwitz, where a camp inmate is telling other inmates
about poison gas showers? (and they say, oh no, can't be--and then
we see them trooping into the showers...and wow! it's great! what a
shower! apparent moral: don't believe rumors, it's not THAT bad...
grr...) anyway, it bothered me a lot. sorry for raving.

ellen prince

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 3.233

To subscribe, send SUB MENDELE FIRSTNAME LASTNAME to:

                   LISTSERV@YALEVM.YCC.YALE.EDU

Mendele has 2 rules:

	1. Provide a Subject: line.
	2. Sign your article.

Send submissions/responses to:
        mendele@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

Other business:
        nmiller@starbase.trincoll.edu

Anonymous ftp archives available on:
        ftp.mendele.trincoll.edu
        in the directory pub/mendele/files


