
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 4.163
November, 1994

1) Yiddish grammar (Zev bar-Lev)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 1 Nov 94 15:52:15 PST
From: zbarlev@zeus.sdsu.edu
Subject: Yiddish grammar

it is interesting to see the issue of grammar debated, if not hotly, then
at least with some persistence, with someone bringing up the issue
periodically. of the various bulletin-boards i am on for different
languages, nowhere else do i see this issue discussed in this way.  hhas
vehhalila that i should observe that it is a siman of the unique status
of yiddish that such a question should be debated.  (please don't anyone
correct my spellings:  i was using hebrew, not yiddish.  it is unlikely
that i would ever dare use yiddish here, even without the grammar
discussions.)

i admit that i have heard discussions and angry observations about
rampant ungrammaticality.  when i once gave a paper at an arabic
conference, i could take comfort in the fact that, however many errors in
my samples, the egyptian press had just been thoroughly condemned for the
low level of their arabic!

indeed, speakers of arabic typically hold foreigners to a "higher"
standard: we should speak (real) arabic, even though they can't, due to
the unfortunate accident of their having been born many centuries after
Mohammad!  even the best informant of modern arabic that i ever found,
could do no better than to say "yes, that's how we say it, although it's
not arabic".  i once offended an arab terribly by misspelling a word in a
quote from the qur'an -- i tried to assure him that i am liable (sp?) to
misspell in any language, no matter how "holily" (stet) i regard the
text.

i once had a serbian teacher who said, about some construction: "now make
sure you don't say this, because serbians do all the time."  i had
thought i was there to learn how to talk like serbians, but i quickly
found out the truth!

i heard one counter-person at Jack-in-the-Box correct another for putting
a preposition at the end of a sentence.  (it was probably a particle,
however, not a preposition.) is that a rise in cultural level?

in all my many e-mail conversations, only one has ever commented on my
avoidance of capitals -- and i believe that was on an Learning-Disability
bulletin-board.  LD people sometimes have terrible trouble spelling --
but perhaps i was not exhibiting the "acceptable" kind of misspellings by
not capitalizing.

i still mention to my linguistics classes my grandmother's comment that
yiddish wasn't a language, but "just something we speak". (i judge the
quality of the class by how many laugh.)  she was curious that, when i
did a sort of junior field-method research, at some young age, on her
yiddish, that i could write yiddish without using the alphabet!  (i don't
remember whether i used real IPA or some makeshift substitute.)  i enjoy
teaching people about dialects with the example that yiddish is no more a
dialect of german than german is a dialect of yiddish.

the most interesting discussions of grammaticality, perhaps, take place
about esperanto, where people sometimes feel they have a right to invent
their own dialect during the first months of study.  after all, there are
so few native speakers, it's easy to be an authority.

but, to return (at last) to yiddish, this is the only language where
norms of transcription are discussed -- with one exception:  i'm now
having such arguments on chinese e-mail.  the mainland chinese, it
happens, have invented a romanization, and now teachers are more and more
thinking that any other system should be verboten. (in case this sounds
like a yiddish word: i mean the Gm one.)

one scholar has proposed that the chinese romanization should be a proper
system just like english spelling, so that any homonymous words should
have a different spelling, like "dam" and "damn" (his examples).  other
chinese teachers i know resist the idea that any other transcription
should ever be used with students, whatever the difficulties, e.g. qi is
pronounce chee, cong is pron. tsong.  i can't help feeling that the issue
goes, for many, beyond classroom convenience, and that indeed they want
chinese to have a proper spelling system, where you have trouble looking
words up in a dictionary (as if character dictionaries weren't bad
enough), and -- best of all -- you can mark students down on their
compositions for spelling!

apart from spelling, i notice on this bulletin board, instead of a
discussion about what are the norms, or even about how few people observe
the norms nowadays, we have a discussion about whether the norms should
be followed, or whether "we" should be tolerant.  the many people who
know the language informally and partially (i don't even include myself
in this number), it seems, are going to be urged to use YIVO grammar and
lexicon -- even if they have to take courses.  and even speakers of
"non-standard dialects" should be -- what, ostracized? made to feel
guilty?

old standards are silly enough -- people who insist on a pseudo-biblical
pronunciation in preference to daily speech in hebrew, or the example of
arabic mentioned earlier.

languages other than yiddish with new standards have the decency to get
confused about what these standards are, if not to argue about them.  for
example, the serbo-croats publish (or used to publish) a whole periodical
or so on correct serbo-croat.  only in yiddish, it appears, can we expect
people to take the initiative on their own.

in case a conclusion is desired, let me opine that a thorough
"prescriptivism" (standarization, etc.), while it may get mixed reactions
from native speakers of a language (some will think it nitpicky, others
will think it's the height of morality), can have a disastrous effect on
learners, non-native speakers, and even exiled native speakers of a
language: they quickly see that their efforts aren't good enough, and
they quickly stop speaking.

zev bar-Lev

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 4.163

Mendele has 2 rules:

	1. Provide a meaningful Subject: line
	2. Sign your article (full name please)

A Table of Contents is now available via anonymous ftp, along with weekly
updates.

Anonymous ftp archives available on:
          ftp.mendele.trincoll.edu
          in the directory pub/mendele/files

Archives available via gopher on:
        gopher.cic.net

Send articles to:
        mendele@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

Send change-of-status messages to:
        listserv@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

        a. For a temporary stop: set mendele nomail
        b. To resume delivery: set mendele mail
        c. To unsubscribe kholile: unsub mendele

Other business:
        nmiller@mail.trincoll.edu



