
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 1 no. 234
April 30, 1992
 
1) Review of Harshav's THE MEANING OF YIDDISH (Arnold J. Band)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 29 Apr 92 11:16 PDT
From: "Arnold J. Band" <IMH0ORA@MVS.OAC.UCLA.EDU>
Subject: review

The following review of THE MEANING OF YIDDISH by Benjamin
Harshav (University of California Press: Berkeley, 1990)
was invited by MODERN PHILOLOGY where it should appear in
the near future.  As such, the present document should be
considered a private, pre-publication draft, not for
citation as long as it has not been published by the
journal which commissioned it. I am sending it to MENDELE
readers to solicit discussion since I have found that the
book has elicited very little serious comment (Yerushalmi
in TLS, Taub in AJS REVIEW, and Halkin in JERUSALEM REPORT)
and I am a bit tired of reading recipes in MENDELE.
 
  by Arnold J. Band, UCLA
 
    The title of Benjamin Harshav's semi-popular volume on
the nature and semiotics of Yiddish is designed  to alert
the reader to the specific preoccupations of the
presentation, its desire to clarify the peculiar ways in
which the Yiddish language signifies and, beyond that, what
endows modern Yiddish poetry with its tremendous expressive
strength.  The title might also suggest a critique of such
sentimental popularizations as Leo Rosten's THE JOY OF
YIDDISH , wistful nostalgia trips that offer the
intelligent reader little more than cute phrases, touching
anecdotes, or clever jokes.   Harshav takes his reader on a
different trip, or rather, provides him with a different
"travel report":" ...an essay attempting to rethink and
present to the intelligent reader some of the basic aspects
of the culture of Yiddish, the historical and social
conditions that combined to mold the peculiar nature of its
language, literature, and life" (p.xii).
 
    Now, for the first time, we have a book that can
introduce the curious student of language or literature to
the fascinating problematics of Yiddish. Up to now, we have
had only the sentimental journeys or Max Weinreich's
magisterial, but detailed and highly specialized History of
the Yiddish Language (1980) translated from the four volume
Yiddish original.
 
    Harshav writes in full awareness that with the
annihilation of much of Yiddish-speaking Jewry in the
Holocaust and the attrition of Yiddish culture in America
and the former Soviet Union, the future of Yiddish as a
viable language or culture is dim.  He can thus fully
identify with the poet Yankev Glatshteyn,  in speaking of
"the end of a language," the name of the final, lyrical
chapter of this book.  The Yiddish poet writing of the
murder of the bearers of Yiddish culture envisages the
death of the language they spoke and he writes.   And yet,
Harshav does not indulge in a lament for the loss of the
culture, but rather attempts to understand how it worked,
how its language functioned both diachronically and
synchronically. Similarly, he avoids the tired ideological
tirades of the Yiddishists  and the Hebraists who often
fought between 1890 and 1939 over the linguistic birthright
to Jewish culture -- an often bitter sibling rivalry in
which the Hebraists claimed historical privilege and the
Yiddishists pointed to popular allegiance and usage.  For
Harshav who writes in and studies both languages, this old
sibling rivalry is meaningless;  in fact, the full import
of THE MEANING OF YIDDISH will be clear only when his essay
on the meaning of Hebrew shall be translated from Hebrew.
(It has appeared in the second volume of the Israeli
journal,  ALPAYIM,in 1990.)
 
    Complementing Harshav's personal "internal
polylinguilism" is his own "external-polylingualism," his
intimate familiarity with Russian literature and Western
culture, in general.  The theoretical movements which
inform the entire essay are essentially Russian formalism
with its emphasis on linguistics and, those semioticians
whose inspiration derives from the Russian Formalists or
the Prague Linguists.   He acknowledges his debt to Max and
Uriel Weinreich, Itamar Even Zohar, and Khone Shmeruk and
refers, to be sure, to several of his own articles.  This
essay is thus the culmination of several decades of work
and reflects in many intimate senses the personal
autobiography of its author -- however he might strive for
scientific objectivity.   Harshav, for example, is a
secularist and a literary historian and thus excludes from
his consideration the masses of pious Yiddish speaking
Jews, perhaps the bulk of European, Yiddish speaking Jewry
who certainly did not participate in the "modern Jewish
revolution" to which he devotes chapter five.  It is
increasingly clear as one progresses in the essay that the
material on which he bases his world view is literature
rather than social documentation, poetry rather than prose,
and American Yiddish poetry rather than European Yiddish
poetry.   In fact, the book actually dovetails with the
introduction to the superb anthology, AMERICAN YIDDISH
POETRY, which he edited together with Barbara Harshav (
University of California Press: Berkeley, 1986).  One
assumes that THE MEANING OF YIDDISH was inspired in part by
the realization that the anthology needed a broader
explanatory preface.

    Much of the sophistication of the poetry in the
anthology is lost without this prefatory essay.  The essay,
nevertheless, stands by itself and constitutes a fine
introduction to a variety of topics which the literate
reader would want to understand.
 
    More interesting, perhaps, than the genesis of this
essay is its deeper structure, an example of the
relationship between theory and text. Harshav's theoretical
exposition leading from Weinreichian "fusionism" to the
semiotics of Yiddish communication and the historical
contextualization of literary works finds its application
specifically in the Introspectivist Yiddish poets of New
York in the 1920's and 1930's.  These theories fit these
texts.  One wonders what modifactions in theory Harshav
would be constrained to make if he were to use a different
set of prooftexts.

Arnold J.Band

               (Continued in Vol 1.235)

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol 1.234

Submissions: mendele@vax1.trincoll.edu

Business: nmiller@vax1.trincoll.edu

Please sign your articles.
 
