Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 1 no. 25
June 17, 1991
 
1) Introduction (Mina Graur)
2) Paul Wexler and a request (Mina Graur)
3) Clarifications for all and several (Mikhl Herzog)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 02 Jun 91 10:17:39 IST
From: Dan Graur <H03@TAUNIVM.BITNET>
Subject: MENDELE

My name is Mina Graur and I am a researcher at the
Dinor Institute (the Hebrew University in Jerusalem). I
finished my Ph.D. dissertation at Rice University in
Houston, and I wrote a biography of an anarchist called
Rudolf Rocker, who for a quarter of a century edited
the "Arbeiter Fraint" the main anarchist newspaper in
the yiddish language in London's east end. i am now
working on the history of the Jewish labor movement in
the USA with special emphasis on the Jewish trade
unions.  Best wishes. 

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 17 Jun 91 12:19:56 IST
From: Dan Graur <H03@TAUNIVM.BITNET>
Subject: Paul Wexler and a request

1. Dr. Paul Wexler from the Department of Linguistics
at Tel Aviv University has no e-mail, nor does he seem
to believe in such forms of communciations. He told me
that people interested in communications with him
should use the regular mail.
  
2. I am interested in locating books in Yiddish by Dr.
Hillel Solotaroff and Saul Yanovsky, both American
anarchists, the latter was the editor of the "Arbeter
Fraint."
 
Mina Graur
H03 @ TAUNIVN

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sat, 15 Jun 91  01:00 EDT
From: ZOGUR@CUVMB.BITNET
Subject: 1. tsu, tse, tsi; 2. To Sigrid, David, Noyekh

Re: "tsuzamen": untangling the plonter
 
In my 'tikn-toes', the other day, I spoke of the Litvak
having gotten the better of me. What was that about?
 
Yiddish has the following:
 
1. TSU i) the preposition 'to' [tsu der tir 'to the
door']: often unstressed, pronounced "tsi" (short "i",
better transcribed as 'shwa'), written tsadik-vov;
 
      ii) the adverb 'too' [tsu fil 'too much']; prima-
ry or secondary stress, never pronounced 'tsi', written
tsadik-vov.  

     iii) the verb complement (comparable to the "sepa-
rable prefix" in German grammar) "tsUgeyn" 'to
approach'--always stressed--"gey tsU tsu der tir (i.e.
stressed "tsU" followed by unstressed "tsi") 'go over
to the door'.

Note: i) the category of Yiddish verb complement can't
be equated with the German separable prefix because it
includes a multitude of stressed Hebrew-origin
invariants (the so-called periphrastic verbs): e.g
mOYre hobn. er hot mOYre, nekOme nemen, etc.  

     ii) 'er hot mOYyre tsUtsugeyn tsu der tir' (He's
afraid to go over to the door. In this sequence, the
first 'tsu' is stressed, the second may have secondary
stress, the third is unstressed.
 
Southern Yiddish speakers (Poland, the Ukraine, etc.)
would say "tsI:tsigeyn (with long I:, or 'tsI:tsigayn')
tsi di/der tir".  
 
2. TSE The (inseperable) prefix, always unstressed,
written tsadik-ayin: tsegeyn 'to melt'; tselakhn zikh
'to burst into laughter. THE LITVAK OFTEN PRONOUNCES
THIS 'tsu' TOO'. "er vil tsUgeyn ahin eyder der shney
vet tsegeyn"
 
3. TSI 'whether'; interrogative; unstressed: "Du kumst
tsi nit"? "Tsi kumstu tsi nit?" "Ikh veys nit tsi du
kumst". Again, THE LITVAK OFTEN PRONOUNCES THIS 'tsu'
TOO'.
 
So? The word that started this whole sermon is spelled
'tsuzamen' and pronounced 'tse/tsizamen'. Properly
transliterated it should be spelled 'tsuzamen'. Tran-
scribed, it's more like 'tse/tsizamen'. In either case,
the "a" is stressed. I guess I didn't know whether I
was transliterating (as usual) or transcribing. Hence
the confusion.
 
To: Sigrid Peterson
 
     Regards from the upper West Side.
 
     Come back for a summer and get a good start study-
ing Yiddish intensively at the Columbia YIVO summer
program.
     A Yiddish proverb states: "oyb a mame zogt af ir
kind mamzer, meg men ir gleybn". If Mr. Lenowitz (may
he forgive me) says he doesn't know Yiddish, believe
him, and find yourself another teacher. If his CV
really talks about a Yiddish film called "di mensh ohne
velt" find out what the title is supposed to mean. The
Yiddish word is "mentsh", either masculine "der mentsh"
or neuter "dos mentsh", the latter a dialect form
meaning 'woman'. In any event, never "di mentsh". And,
of course, "ohne" is German. The Yiddish is "on".
 
     An aid to the "vitsn": Find a copy of Olsvanger's
"Royte Pomerantsn", a book of Yiddish anecdotes in
Latin letters, in the author's Latvian Yiddish dialect.
It's really quite a wonderful collection and the words
you're apt not to understand are glossed. Seek out the
anecdote called "Daytsh" for some insight into the
problems you're having with comprehension in different
contexts.
 
 
To: David Sherman
 
Since Hebrew-origin words retain their traditional
spellings in Yiddish, regardless of pronunciation,
dictionaries have to list differently spelled entries
even if they are pronounced identically. The UW Dictio-
nary, lists the pronunciations "ole(ha)sholem" (femi-
nine), "olevasholem" (masculine), "aleyem hasholem"
(plural).  Harkavy lists both singular forms but does-
n't provide the pronunciation of either. Various pro-
nouncing dictionaries of Hebrew-Aramaic words in Yid-
dish that I've consulted also distinguish the two. I
can claim only that I had heard reference to "di bobe
oleVasholem" (the "masculine" form) long before I was
aware of the grammatical differentiation in Hebrew. I
don't know whether I would venture to say that I heard
the same word for the plural too.
 
 
 
To: Noyekh Miller
 
1. "melintses" is a real variant, not a mocking form. A
Slavist to the rescue, please.
 
2. Are you referring to the so-called "Geolinguistic"
theory? I don't think its propositions, concerning
chronological inferences to be drawn various patterns
of geographic distribution of linguistic variants, were
necessarily discredited. You'll find similar, quite
important propositions in Edward Sapir's 1915 article
"Time Perspective in Aboriginal American Culture". The
problem may lie in trying to make inferences about the
chronology of linguistic (or cultural) change, or the
compass direction of change, from the geographic pat-
terns alone (without reference to the linguistic "sub-
stance" or to historical sources). On the other hand,
certain (recurrent) geographic patterns generally do
permit the formulation of alternative, reasonable
hypotheses to explain them. (See, e.g. MH "The Yiddish
Language in Northern Poland: Its Geography and Histo-
ry". Bloomington & The Hague, 1965).
 
3. Comparing notes on whether pop sociologists or pop
linguists have more trouble is a subject unto itself.
 

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol 1.25

