
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 2 no. 97
November 12, 1992
 
1) Various (Leonard Prager)
2) An-ski (Bob Rothstein)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 11 Nov 92 14:28:41 IST
From: Leonard Prager <RHLE302@HAIFAUVM.BITNET>
Subject: various

Re "Itsik is witsik".  Tendlau No. 1004 writes: "Als Spott
gegen einen schlecht en Witz, vielleicht auf einem
besondern Falle beruhend, vielleicht auch nur des Reimes
wegen gebildet."  I would bet on the rime-origin.  And in
making the rime Itsik:shpitsik I was trying mainly to point
to the Standard Yiddish Romanization, which does not use
the NHG-influenced -ig spellings, such as, unfortunately we
have in that excellent if orthographically flawed
dictionary by Harkavi (Y.-Heb.-Eng., New York, 1928,
reprinted recently with intro by Dovid Katz).  NHG gives us
_herzig_ and Harkavi gives us the cognate _harzig_, but the
word should be transcribed _hartsik_.  Reb Itsik tells us
he is getting used to the idea that Yiddish is a language.
The phonetic differences between NHG _herzig_ and Y.
_hartsik are not the only ones.  There are the semantic
differences as well:  the German word means 'sweet, lovely,
nice' wheareas the Yiddish word seems to carry a certain
ethical force: 'sincere, kind' as well as the core idea of
'hearty, cordial', which is close to but not the identical
to the ordinary NHG uses.  Yiddish is certainly Germanic
but it is not German.
 
I was trying to make a similar point in correcting
_Deytshen_ to _daytshn_, which in the SYR has a pasekh
under tsvey yodn and therefore regardless of pronunciation
must be written (except in phonetic notation): _daytshn_.
It is of course true that in CY it rimes approx. with
GenAmerEngl _botch_, though you can hear a Dzigan (from
Lodz) stretch out and nazalize the vowel considerably.  To
sum up: -ik and -dik, not -ig and -dig; syllabic n = _n,
not -en.
 
And, of course, welcome back Itsik.  Lomir ale zayn vitsik,
un afile shpitsik, ober nisht -- khas vekholile -- hitsik!
 
2)  Re Anski:  I have translated and commented on two
folktales which Ansky retold in Yiddish.  See "Two Yiddish
Tales About Sir Moses Montefiore (Text and Commentary,"
:HP1.Jewish Language Review:EHP1. 5 (1985), 64-84 {cf.
later version in :HP1.The Jewish Quarterly:EHP1. (London),
34:1 (1987), 37-44.} "Moses Montefiore in Ashkenazic
Folklore," :HP1.The Jewish Quarterly:EHP1. (London), Vol.
34, No. 1 (125) {1987}, 37-44.
 
3)  Tonsorial Judaism is a fascinating subject which we
will have to go into more deeply.  I recall that Reb Avrom
Hersh took off his Jewish headgear at the German border and
put on his _kapelyush_ so as not to embarass his
fashionable wife at the spas where they stayed.  I'm
referring to Y.Y.Zinger's Brider ashkenazi, which I've
been dipping in lately.
 
4)  Re khasidic geography.  I don't have the Mendele no.
before me, but I believe someone asserted that most of the
x and y khsidim lived in a particular place in Galicia.  I
was quoting the journalist Shoshkes, who was being somewhat
whimsical but must have known what he was talking about.
Most chasidic courts were in small towns.  Again, from
Brider ashkenazi: The Warsaw magnate Kalmen Ayzn (NHG
Eisen) asks his private matchmaker Shmuel Zaynvil: "Un tsu
vemen fort er, der Avrom Hersh?"  He is told: "Ka
aleksander.  Ba vorkers lebn, iz er geforn tsum vorker."
"Alekdander... Vorke... hot der alter farkrimt."  The last
line warns us that there is a lot of mythology about the
various courts and we always need to know the source of an
utterance on this or that rebe or tsadik.  But chasidim
traveled to their rebes and thus came from all over.  It is
true that over two-thirds of the Jews in Galicia lived in
the Eastern part, in what is not Ukraine.
 
5) Thanks for the -Polin- notice.  It is a truly first-rate
publication. I have to read it in the library because it is
so expensive, but it is worth what the library pays.
 
Leonard Prager (Haifa)
 
2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 12 Nov 92 16:54:35 -0500
From: ROBERT.ROTHSTEIN@SLAVIC.umass.edu
Subject: An-ski

     Chana and Yosl Mlotek's column in the _Forverts_,
"Perl fun der yidisher poezye," which I heartily recommend
to all Mendelnikes, ran an article on An-ski on August 16,
1992 on the occasion of his 70th yortsayt.  They published
some comments from readers on October 19 and some
additional comments of mine on November 2.  For Sarah Stein
and Alice Nakhimovsky (privet!) and anyone else interested,
here is the information that I supplied.

     An-ski lived for several years among coal miners in
the area of Slavianoserbsk (near present-day
Voroshilovgrad, then Lugansk [perhaps renamed again as of
1992?], in what was then the Ekaterinoslavskaia guberniia)
in Ukraine.  He was so appalled by the living conditions of
the miners that he wrote an article entitled "Miners' Life"
("Shakterskaia zhizn'") and tried unsuccessfully to get it
published.  In 1888 he sent the article to the Russian
writer Gleb Uspenskii, who encouraged him and ultimately
helped to get a revised version of the article published in
_Russkoe Bogatstvo_ in 1892 under the title "A Sketch of
the Coal Industry" ("Ocherk kamenno-ugol'noi
promyshlennosti").

     Uspenskii was one of the few people in 19th-century
Russia to take an interest in contemporary folklore and to
call for its collection alongside of the collection of
survivals of old folklore.  His 1889 essay "New Folk Verse"
("Novye narodnye stishki") is often mentioned as one of the
first treatments of workers' folklore, and he is credited
with popularizing the term _chastushka_ for the ditties
that were then becoming popular.  In his essay he made use
of An-ski's material, quoting from the last chapter of his
manuscript article, which consisted of seven miners' songs.
Uspenskii credited them to "S. Z. Vit'bin," a variant of
his correspondent's pseudonym "S. Vid'bin."  An-ski's
manuscript notebook containing the songs, dated August 20,
1887, is preserved in the Uspenskii archives in Russia; it
was first published as part of an article by N. V.
Alekseeva, "G. I. Uspenskii, russkaia narodnaia pesnia i ee
sobirateli" in _Uchenye zapiski Leningradskogo gos. univ._,
1949, no. 122, pp. 184-223.

     Thus alongside of his contributions to Yiddish
folkloristics, An-ski was apparently the first collector of
Russian miners' songs and one of the first collectors of
Russian workers' folklore more generally.

          Bob Rothstein

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol 2.97

