
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 08.050
September 3, 1998

90 yorikn yoyvl fun der ershter yidisher shprakh-konferents in Tshernovits
                                Part IV

1) Peretz and the Czernowitz Conference (Marvin Zuckerman)
2) Peretz's Speech at the Conference (Marvin Zuckerman and Marion Herbst)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 20 Aug 1998 16:46:20 -0700
From: "Marvin S. Zuckerman" <Marvin_S._Zuckerman@laccd.cc.ca.us>
Subject: Peretz and the Czernowitz Conference

In 1908, a group of Yiddish intellectuals decides that Yiddish language and
literature has reached a level and an historical moment that required a
world-wide Jewish conference on the subject of Yiddish. In April the
initiators of the conference (Birnbaum, Cordon, Evalenko, Pinski, and
Zhitlovsky) send out a letter and an invitation to various segments and
levels of Jewish life all over the world. One of these is, of course,
addressed to Peretz, with a request that he undersign the state-ment in the
invitation as a sponsor and as one who is in accord with Its aims. 

The invitation reads in part, as follows:

   Honored Sir!

   In the past several decades the Yiddish language has made great progress.
   Its literature has achieved a level of which no one had imagined it
   capable. Yiddish newspapers are distributed in hundreds of thousands of
   copies daily and weekly. Yiddish poets write songs which are sung by the
   people, stories which are read by the people, plays which the people
   eagerly flock to see. Every day the language itself becomes more refined
   and richer. 

   But it continues to lack one thing which older tongues possess. The
   latter are not permitted to roam around freely and wildly in the
   linguistic world to attract all kinds of dis-eases, defects, and perhaps
   even death. They are guarded as a precious child is guarded. No one,
   however, pays heed to the Yiddish language. Thousands of Yiddish words
   are replaced by German, Russian and English words which are completely
   unnecessary. The live rules of the language which are born and develop
   with it in the mouths of the people go unrecorded, and it appears not to
   possess any such rules. Each person writes it in a different way, with
   his own spelling because no standard authoritative Yiddish orthography
   has thus far been established.

   True, the disgrace attached to Yiddish in the past has diminished.
   People are less and less ashamed of the con-temporary language of our
   people. It is gradually coming to be reckoned with and respected. It is
   coming to be understood that in Yiddish the Jewish spirit is reflected
   and its value for the survival of our nation is beginning to be
   comprehended. But it is still an object of ridicule and con-tempt.
   People are still ashamed of it. And is this not because of the faults
   noted above?

   If this be true, a stop must be put to these things. A fence needs to be
   established, some sort of protection for our precious mother-tongue so
   that it not wander about aimlessly as until now, so that it not become
   chaotic, tat-tered and divided. All who are involved with the language,
   writers, poets, linguists, and those who simply love it-must confer and
   find the appropriate means and methods of establishing an authority to
   which all will have to and want to defer.

   Honored sir: If you share the views herein expressed, you are invited to
   attend the Conference which we are call-ing on behalf of the Yiddish
   language. [From E. Goldsmith, Architects of Yiddishism (1976), pp. 183-4,
   his translation of this from Di Ershte Yidishe Shprakh-Konftrents (Vilna,
   1931), pp. 2,3.]

Peretz's initial reaction to this invitation is luke-warm. He writes back,
saying that he doesn't like its "American" preface. Here is the beginning of
the letter he wrote (1908) to Dr. Nathan Birnbaum (my translation): 

   Most Esteemed Doctor:
   
   It was very hard for us, Doctor, to answer.
   
   We are, of course, very interested in a conference, but we could not
   under any circumstances sign [endorse] your invitation. We certainly did
   not want to hinder you - we would even come to the conference - but not
   sign [endorse] your invitation.

   First of all, if you will forgive us, we don't like its American
   preface... Unfortunately, we don't believe in the "great progress" of
   Yiddish. What exists?

He then goes on to list a number of issues he thought needed to be dealt
with-and if the initiators were in accord with them, they could then sign
[endorse] his list and use his name. Here is his list: 

   1) Orthography
   2) Grammar
   3) Foreign usages
   4) A dictionary
   5) Translation of the Bible
   6) The press
   7) Literature
   8) Dramaturgy
   9) The significance of the language as a national or folk-loristic
      language and its relationship to Hebrew.
  10)  The ethics of international copyright.

At the conference itself, as a result of his literary reputation, but also as
a result of his personal charisma, he takes center stage. His keynote address
is received with great enthusiasm. 

The five-day conference is torn by party politics, the conflict between
Hebraists and Yiddishists, Bundists and Zionists, and other matters.  Many
issues are argued and discussed. Finally, the central issue becomes a debate
between those who would like Yiddish declared the national language of the
Jews and those who are opposed to this posi-tion for one reason or another. 

Peretz's position is that Hebrew is our national language and that Yiddish is
our folk language. 

The conference arrives at a compromise resolution/declaration:  "Yiddish is
_a_ [not _the_] national language." Peretz declares in his keynote address: 

   And we call out to the world: we are a Jewish nation and Yiddish is our
   language and we wish to live our lives and create our cultural heritage
   in this language. This is the language in which we wish to amass our
   treasure, to fash-ion our culture, to awaken our soul and to unite with
   each other across all countries and in all times.

For years afterwards, the 1908 Czernowitz Language Conference is considered a
major milestone in the history of the Yiddish language and literature.
Peretz's role was pivotal. 

As soon as Peretz came to Czernowitz, he started to help with the work, and
showed great energy and passion. He became one of the main activists at the
conference, its' living soul. He was the vice-president; he held the second
speech at the opening festivities; he read the report about the world-wide
Yiddish-language organizations; he took an active role in the discussions and
during the conference. Peretz spoke at a variety of evenings in Czernowitz
and later in many other cities of Galicia and Bukovina. Thanks to Peretz, the
evenings in these cities became a great manifestation in support of Yiddish
and Yiddish literature, and they became engraved in the minds of the
attendees. 

The conference opened with a speech by Dr. N Birnboym. As the Haynt, a
Yiddish newspaper reported Birnboym's speech did not make the proper
impression because he spoke a weak Yiddish. Peretzs' speech, the second one
of the evening made a strong impression, therefore and the audience responded
with tremendous applause. "Peretz's appearance on the platform," according to
a reporter in a Czernowitz newspaper "evoked tremendous applause and
indescribable joy." The speech was interrupted several times with
enthusiastic applause. 

In his memoirs of the Czernowitz Language Conference, Matisyohu Meises, says
the following: "We were waiting, full of suspense and spiritual hunger for
Peretz's opening speech at the Language Conference. He didn't disappoint us.
We heard powerful, mighty words from his mouth...  certain moments of his
speech have remained etched in my memory. I remember experiencing a kind of
electrical current which ran through my limbs. And the kind of glimpse I for
a moment had into the soul of Peretz the man as in his opening speech he said
'the state is the greatest criminal'... in those few words I saw mirrored
Peretz's weltanschauung." 

Reprinted from "Selected works of I.L. Peretz" / edited by Marvin Zuckerman
and Marion Herbst / Malibu, Calif. : Joseph Simon/Pangloss Press, 1996.
The book is available from the National Yiddish Book Center.

Marvin Zuckerman

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 20 Aug 1998 00:39:48 EDT
From: Miriamke@aol.com 
Subject: Peretz's Speech at the 1908 Czernowitz Language Conference

Here is his speech as it appeared in Dr. Birnboym's Vokhnblat #2, Czernowitz,
1908 (Translated by Marvin Zuckerman and Marion Herbst from Nakhmen Meisel,
Briv un redes fun I.L. Peretz (New York: YKUF, 1944):

Honored Conference:

Three liberating moments in Jewish history created our movement.

I don't want to he a prophet, and to proclaim that we are now experiencing a
new historical moment, that we are uncovering a new source of fresh, living
waters in God's vineyard, and that from this day forward this place will be
watered and will bloom. "Something," though, has been achieved among us, and
that something was elicited by those three liberating moments. 

The poor Jewish masses, the poor ignorant Jews begin to liberate themselves.
They lose confidence in both the Jewish Talmudic scholar, and in the rich
man. The rich man's "charity" does not fill his stomach;  the Talmudic
scholar's Toyre doesn't give him any joy. The masses long, feel, want to live
their own poor lives in their own way. And Chassidism emerges. Toyre for
everybody. 

And this is the first moment.

Yiddish doesn't begin with Isaac Meir Dik. The Chassidic tale, that is the
"Genesis." The tales in praise of The Baal-Shem and other tales are
folk-poetry. The first folk-poet is Reb Nakhman of Bratslav and his seven
beggars. 

Also, the Jewish woman - the Jewish wife - the Jewish girl awoke and demanded
something for herself. Women's books appeared, and out of Judeo-German was
born a "mother-tongue." 

And the Jewish people still has two tongues: a language for the scholars in
the house of study - the language of the Toyre, the language of the Gemore,
and the second for the masses and the Jewish daughter... 

But from these three moments alone the Yiddish language would not have
emerged. Now the Jewish worker appears, the Jewish proletariat, and creates
for itself an instrument for its struggle for life, its working-class culture
in Yiddish. The worker is simply not satisfied just with women's prayers and
prayers from the women's synagogue, and not just with the wonder-tales from
behind the stove in the synagogue.  He wants to and he must express himself
in Yiddish. And the Yiddish secular book in the Yiddish language appears. 

But all of that would not have brought us together; if we have come together
from many different countries and states to proclaim equality for Yiddish
language among all languages, it is also as a result of a forth
socio-political international impulse. 

The nation-state, to which small and weak people were sacrificed - as
children were in ancient times to Molokh - the nation-state, that had because
of the interest of the ruling classes and peoples wanted to level everything,
needed to make everything uniform: one army, one language, one school, one
police, and one civil law - that nation-state is losing its luster.

The dense, oily smoke that wrapped itself around the sacrificial altar is
becoming thinner and is being dispersed. The folk, not the nation-state, is
the modern concept! The people, not the Fatherland! And separate cultures,
not borders protected by patrols, guard the separate folk cultures... 

The weak, oppressed people awake, and struggle for their language, for their
own culture against the nation-state. And we, the weakest, have also joined
their ranks. 

The nation-state will no longer falsify the cultures of its peoples, no
longer suppress individuality and differentness. This is the byword of the
multitudes, and we are in their ranks under our own banner and in the name of
our own cultural interests. 

We don't want to be anyone's handmaiden. A lackey people can-not create
cultural riches - and we do!

And the best place for our gathering was here in Bukovina, especially its
capital, Czernowitz. Here where people of various nationalities, speaking
many languages, live side-by-side, it is easier to do our work in our
language. We stroll in the evening in the streets and from various windows
stream out the sounds of different languages, all kinds of folk-music. We
want our own windows! Our own distinct motif in the folk-symphony. 

We no longer want to be fragmented, and to render to every Moloch
nation-state its tribute: There is one people - Jews, and its language is -
Yiddish. 

And in this language we want to amass our cultural treasures, create our
culture, rouse our spirits and souls, and unite culturally with all countries
and all times. 

We did not come here simply to talk amongst ourselves and to issue
proclamations. We have come here to _work_ together. There will be various
proposals for important tasks, but two such tasks that I consider of the
utmost important I want to mention at the outset. If Yiddish is to become a
real language for us, then all the old cultural treasures of our great past
must become a part of it. If Yiddish is to become a full member in the family
of the languages of the world, it must become accessible to the world. 

I, therefore, want to propose the translation into Yiddish of all our
cultural treasures from our free, golden past, primarily the translation into
Yiddish of the Bible. Also the transliteration of our best cultural treasures
into Roman letters. We no longer want to be crude, unrefined parvenus or
upstart newly-rich. Culture includes tradition! And we don't want to
introduce our culture to the peoples of the world through mechanical
translations that deaden the living word. 

We have come here to talk less and work more. Consequently we ask everyone to
work more [applause]. We thank Dr. Birnboym for bringing us all together. We
thank the academic association "Yiddish Culture" which dedicated itself to
this purpose and with all its strength helped to publicize our conference.
Also, let us remember today that great man, the first to create works in our
modern, authentic Yiddish literature;  who gave us the first classic work in
the Yiddish language, and who is unfortunately not here. We are without
Mendele Moykher-Sforim! [loud applause of many minutes duration] Permit me to
propose that we should, in the name of the entire conference, send him a
greeting telegram [more applause]. 


Reprinted from "Selected works of I.L. Peretz" / edited by Marvin Zuckerman
and Marion Herbst / Malibu, Calif.: Joseph Simon/Pangloss Press, 1996. 485 p.
The book is available from the National Yiddish Book Center.

Mirke (Marion) Herbst and Marvin Zuckerman
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 08.050

Address for the postings to Mendele: mendele@lists.yale.edu
Address for the list commands: listproc@lists.yale.edu

Mendele on the Web:

http://mendele.commons.yale.edu
http://sunsite.unc.edu/yiddish/mendele.html





