
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 3.162
December 10, 1993

1) Af, uf, oyf (Mikhl Herzog)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri Dec 10 09:09:59 1993
From: ZOGUR@CUVMB.CC.COLUMBIA.EDU
Subject: Af, uf, oyf, etc.

Time to talk about the word or words spelled OYF. Again a word of
caution. My keyboard prevents me from using a number of diacritics
which would make reading easier, question marks, etc. Please bear
with me.

To account for the, Litvish, i.e. Lithuanian//Belorussian situation
which distinguishes two functions for the form or forms in question,
we are compelled to consider the possibility of two historically
different etyma. The Soviet spelling system distinguishes ALEF FEY,
the preposition in AFN TISH from the verb complement ALEF, VOV, YUD,
FEY in UFSHTEYN, the so called separable prefix of German grammar.
For now, I will avoid the complication which UFRUFN introduces.

In the Northern Ukraine, Volhynia, more or less, the two functions
are also distinguished as AFN TISH but IFSHTEYN and, perhaps, a more
southerly neighbor, OFN TISH and IFSHTEYN. neighbor.

IF is a very specific regional anomaly to which I will return. It
would complica the issue to deal with it now except to say that its
form, together with the persistence of the differentiation, point to
the essentially Litvish origin of t of its distribution. More later.

In ALL other areas, the two functions are served by identical forms.
In Alsace, UF. In Kurland, AUF. In Hungary and the Carpathians, OUF.
In a narrow area between Poland and Lithuania, OYF. In Poland and
the Southern Ukraine, OF. NOTE WELL that this OF is NOT the same as
the OF which is paired with IF more to the Ukrainian North.

Now to the history. We must have recourse to the facts of German.
Modern German, in which both functions are served by the single form
AUF does not provide an answer. As for a possible historical
distinction in function it is not clear whether medieval German
provides an answer either. BUT, medieval German DOES provide
alternate forms which may have been regionally differentiated. My
pocket Lexer lists OUF and UF, the latter with a length mark. It
might be instructive to look first at the general development of
Yiddish word that are cognate with these Medieval German vowels.

1. MG OU corresponds to the vowel in Standard Yiddish LOYFN, KOYFN,
OYG, BOYM, hence, possibly  OYF. However, these are words with
Litvish variants LEYFN, KEYFN, EYG, but NOT EYF, and Western Yiddish
LAAFN, KAAFN, AAG.

2. MG long U corresponds to the vowel in Standard Yiddish HOYZ,
MOYZ, BOYKH, hence OYF as well.

BOTH groups can yield a legitimate OYF variant although, in the
absence of Litvi EYF, OYF cannot be traced to group 1. It is
evident, though, that OYF, where it does occur in the language is,
historically justified, however much the Standard spelling obscures
the regional complexities.

In fact, group 2 can account for ALL the Yiddish variants, EXCEPT
where the two functions are formally differentiated. I return to
these now. Consider Lithuanian//Belorussian AFN TISH but UFSHTEYN.

UFSHTEYN is group 2, along with (largely Belorussian) HUYZ, MUYZ,
BUYKH. AF is either a rare Westernism (from MG OU) , along with say
LAFER, i.e. LOYFER, the bishop in chess, or a derivative of
neighboring Kurlandish AUF, by means of the neutralization of the
monophthong//diphthong distinction before the labial F, parallel to
the similar development before the labial M in such wo as
Lithuanian//Belorussian KAM, RAMEN, OPSHAMEN (elsehere OY, OU, O).
Not so simple, right.

Anyway, to the South of AFN TISH, UFSHTEYN, we find AFN TISH,
IFSHTEYN in an area in which the vowel in the verb complement UF had
already merged with historical U in RUFN, KUMEN, etc. Hence, Litvish
UFRUF and in Volhynia, IFRIF. I doubt very much that there is a form
UFRIF, although I stand ready to be corrected.

This leaves us with OFN TISH and IFSHTEYN further South ans, still
further SOUTH, OFN TISH and OFSHTEYN. The latter is easily derived
from the MG OU form, as I think Ive shown. Of the former pair,
IFSHTEYN needs no further comment. OFN TISH, however, does. In this
area, it is derived from its northern neighbor AFN TISH by the same
change that yields TOTE, MOME, HONT, KOLT VOSER and, in this area
BOBE, NOT BUBE as in  Poland, more clues to the relative chronology
of change, not only among different vowel groups but also among
different words in the same group.

It will occur to some of you that I have not addressed all the
issues involved. I have not considered UF in Alsace, but I want to
see if I can find more Western Yiddish material before I try. I have
not addressed the discrepancy betwee OF and OFN but HUZ, MUZ, BUKH
in the Southern Ukraine. This may have to be dealt with in terms of
individual word history.  I intend to return to the quest once I
have fuller and more precise maps in hand. These maps are scheduled
for Volume V of the Atlas, az me vet derlebn. I am still working on
Volume III which takes me abroad for ten days this afternoon. I look
forward to finding you comments when I return on December 20th.
Volume II, by the way, is in press and should see the light of day
in the Spring.

A gut yontef to all of you.

Mikhl Herzog.

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 3.162

Mendele has 2 rules:

	1. Provide a Subject: line.
	2. Sign your article.

Send submissions/responses to:

        mendele@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

Other business:

        nmiller@starbase.trincoll.edu

Anonymous ftp archives available on:

        ftp.mendele.trincoll.edu
        in the directory pub/mendele/files




