
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 1 no. 235
April 30, 1992
 
1) Review of Harshav's THE MEANING OF YIDDISH (Arnold J. Band)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 29 Apr 92 11:16 PDT
From: "Arnold J. Band" <IMH0ORA@MVS.OAC.UCLA.EDU>
Subject: review

               (Continued from Vol 1 234)

 
    In order to explain the peculiar linguistic nature of
Yiddish, Harshav begins by defining the "dialogic" features
of post-Biblical Jewish literature written in both Hebrew
and Aramaic so that he can later demonstrate the dialogic
aspects of modern Yiddish discourse in Chapter Four which
treats the "Semiotics of Yiddish Communication."   By doing
so, he roots the semiotics of modern Yiddish discourse as
demonstrated in passages from Sholom Aleichem or M. L.
Halpern in the very nature of Talmudic and Midrashic
discourse.  While specialists might find problems with such
broad generalizations, they do help to contextualize the
analysis of lexical and syntactic items.  Relying heavily
as one should on the work of Max Weinreich, Harshav deftly
explains the former's  theory of Yiddish as a language of
fusion. In its earliest stages, probably in the tenth
century, Yiddish was a dialect spoken by Ashkenazic Jews in
Northern France and the Rhineland which had already fused
within it Hebrew -Aramaic, Old French, Old Italian, and
perhaps even Latin dialects which preceded Old French and
Old Italian.  The second and third stage of fusion
involved, respectively, the engagement with the Slavic
languages beginning in the sixteenth century, and English
at the end of the nineteenth century.   While the general
lines of Weinreich's fusion theory are widely accepted and
generally well known, Harshav concretizes this process in
some twenty pages (pp. 40-61) of carefully chosen and
sensitively explained lexical and morphological examples.
The grafting of suffixes derived from one language on roots
derived from a second language or the comparisons of
certain Yiddish words with "Idealized Ashkenazi Hebrew" or
Israeli Hebrew are especially illuminating.   The dazzling
mixture fused into a language with enormous expressive
flexibility -- not a bastardized "zhargon" as it was
regarded by certain Hebrew witers and hostile Gentile
observers.   Harshav summarizes: "In spite of the pervasive
fusion, the German component seems to be in the center, to
dominate the Yiddish text and to provide its 'floor,' as it
were -- its basic morphology, syntactic framework, and the
bulk of its vocabulary -- with the other two
[[Hebrew/Aramaic and Slavic] coloring it in a variety of
ways" (p. 43). And yet, he is open enough to assert that
"The crucial component of Yiddish, what gives it its
'Jewish legitimation,' is Hebrew."
 
    The "openness" of Yiddish, its ability to absorb words
from other languages while adapting them to its own basic
grammatical framework, its dialogic discourse, and its
referencing of Hebrew or Aramaic texts, its the emphasis
Harshav would insist upon within or  in addition to
Weinreich's fusion theory.  While he would agree with
Weinreich and the Introspectivist poets in New York in the
1920's and 1930's that  Yiddish is independent from its
source languages and functioned as one integrated language
in one integrated society -- two of the basic Herderian
criteria of national identity --  he argues that this
independence is balanced by a openness to infusions from
other cultures.  While this argument holds for the poets
who interest him and whose marvelous poetry he has
collected, one wonders how valid this argument is for the
bulk of Yiddish speaking Jewry who were pious and
relatively indifferent or hostile to the "modern Jewish
revolution"  which he describes in Chapter Five.
 
    Two of the more intriguing notions which Harshav
advances in this essay are his ideas on the "semiotics of
Yiddish Communication"  in Chapter Four and "the historical
perspective" on Yiddish  -- and Hebrew -- literature which
he outines in  Chapter Six.  In the first,  he refers to
"a second level of language built above its vocabulary,
morphology, and syntax" by which he means the dialogic
discourse with its associative digressions, its references
to canonized sacred texts, and its penchant for analogies.
In the second, relying on his prodgious knowledge of both
Yiddish and Hebrew literature, Harshav identifies certain
literary norms, i.e. Romanticism, Symbolism, Expressionism,
with specific periods in European, Yiddish, and Hebrew
literature and determines, sketchily but suggestively, when
each literature adopted which norm.  The panorama is
breathtaking, grossly oversimplified, but
thought-provoking.
 
    As we witness the revival of nationalisms throught the
post-Cold War world, THE MEANING OF YIDDISH,  in addition
to its value as an acutely intelligent introduction to
Yiddish culture, can be useful in helping us to understand
the intricacies of the linguistic components of national
identity and conflict.  Even after the rise of modern
nationalism, for instance, the same Jewish writers composed
in both Hebrew and Yiddish. It was only at the turn of this
century, under the pressures of competing ideologies, that
the two languages were identified with distinct and
separate, often opposed camps.   And it is only now, late
in the century, after Hebrew has been firmly established as
the language of State of Israel and Yiddish is no longer an
ideological contestant, that this book could have been
written -- not with a sense of triumph, but with a slightly
wistful detachment which barely masks the underying secular
Jewish modernism that delicately balances nat ionalism with
cosmopolitanism.
 
Arnold J.Band
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol 1.235

Submissions: mendele@vax1.trincoll.edu

Business: nmiller@vax1.trincoll.edu

Please sign your articles.
 
