
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 08.051
September 3, 1998

90 yorikn yoyvl fun der ershter yidisher shprakh-konferents in Tshernovits
                                Part V

1) Yiddish and Yiddishism: A Jewish Nationalist Ideology (David Shneer)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 19 Aug 1998 20:26:31 -0700
From: David Shneer <shneer@uclink2.berkeley.edu>
Subject: Yiddish and Yiddishism: A Jewish Nationalist Ideology (Book Review)

  Emanuel Goldsmith, _Modern Yiddish Culture: The Story of the Yiddish
  Language Movement_.  New York: Fordham University Press, 1997.  321pp.
  Bibliography and index.   ISBN 0-8232-1695-0

In 1908, seventy people gathered in the Austro-Hungarian city of Czernowitz,
Bukovina at a conference proclaiming Yiddish a modern language with a
developing high culture.  The organizers, who occupy much of Emanuel
Goldsmith's book, _Modern Yiddish Culture_, expressed a sense of urgency to
the delegates at the conference that Yiddish as a language and as the binding
glue of Jews throughout Eastern Europe needed help: "People are still ashamed
of [the Yiddish language].If this be true, a stop must be put to these
things.  A fence needs be established, some sort of protection for our
precious mother-tongue so that it does not wander about aimlessly as until
now, so that it does not become chaotic, tattered and divided."  And as the
speakers at the conference reiterated, the status of Yiddish reflected the
status of the Jewish people.  Thus only by saving the language could the Jews
as a people be saved from the onslaught of assimilation. 

Goldsmith, a professor and rabbi, spends the first three chapters of the book
setting the scene for this ideology, known as Yiddishism or the Yiddish
language movement.  He gives a brief history of the politics surrounding the
language, focusing on the mid-nineteenth century when, for the first time,
Jewish writers and intellectuals used Yiddish as a modern, literary language. 
This group of young "modernized" writers, known as maskilim ("Enlighteners"),
turned to Yiddish as a means of spreading haskalah ideology to as wide an
audience as possible.  There was certainly no love of Yiddish among most
maskilic writers, for whom Yiddish was a means to an end - the raising up of
the Jewish masses to a higher cultural standard.  Nonetheless, these writers
sowed the seeds for a modern Yiddish literature and introduced the concept of
publishing Jewish literature for a mass Jewish audience. Goldsmith then turns
to socialism and nationalism, popular movements which spread Yiddish
literature and Yiddish culture throughout Eastern Europe and throughout the
world.  As such populist ideologies spread, the "Jewish masses" and their
language, Yiddish, took center stage.  By the turn of the century, Yiddish
was seen as more than the bumbling jargon of the ignorant masses, but as a
language unto itself bearing the unique stamp of the Jewish people. 

With this foundation, Goldsmith then tells the story of the rise and fall of
Yiddishism.  He traces the biographies of four central figures in Yiddishism:
Natan Birnbaum, Y.L. Peretz, Matisyohu Mieses, and Chaim Zhitlovsky, and then
describes the 1908 Czernowitz Conference - the moment when the movement known
as Yiddishism crystallized.  What binds these four men's ideas together into
an ideology?  Although Goldsmith never spells it out overtly, as the book is
more descriptive than analytic, Yiddishism can be defined as a romantic
nationalist ideology in which Yiddish reflects the Jewish spirit - a concept
taken from early nineteenth century German romantics.  Language was a means
of both binding the nation and staving off the natural tendencies of
assimilation into the host culture.  According to this ideology, Yiddish was
a "poor" language for expressing high concepts, because the maskilim had
viewed Yiddish as a means, not as an end. Yiddishism turned that equation on
its head; Yiddish was the end - the preservation of the Jewish people.  To
achieve this, Yiddish needed to be standardized and used by intellectuals so
that it could develop a high literary culture that would enrich the language.
At the same time Yiddishists realized that such an endeavor needed the social
support of a mass Yiddish speaking/reading base, and thus they wanted to
establish Yiddish-language institutions in autonomous territories.  In other
words, Yiddish would become the language of, to use the words of Benjamin
Harshav, a secular poly-system, in which a high literary culture cultivates a
language while an institutional network establishes a social base and a mass
of speakers of that language. 

If there was a core of intellectuals dedicated to making Yiddish the language
of a secular poly-system, why did Yiddishism fail to achieve in Eastern
Europe what Hebraism did successfully in Palestine?  The failures, in fact,
were clear at the Czernowitz conference itself:  religious Jews found the
movement too secular; Bundists, too nationalistic and lacking in class
content; and most staunch Jewish nationalists became Zionists and, in
general, Hebraists.  Yiddishism, then, fell between socialism and
nationalism. Later, the social base of Yiddishism began shrinking as the
Jewish working class rose in economic and social status in Eastern Europe,
leading to linguistic assimilation.  Most devastatingly, though, the
Holocaust wiped out the entire social base and high cultural elite for
Yiddish in Eastern Europe. 

To all of these historical explanations, Goldsmith adds a new chapter for the
third edition, which gives his own interpretation of the failure of
Yiddishism which cannot be attributed to external social forces alone. 
Goldsmith argues that the ideology of Yiddishism was bankrupt from the
beginning, because in his estimation, language cannot unify the Jewish people
alone.  Goldsmith takes this argument further.  In his words, "The secularism
of the Yiddishists was, for the most part, a dogmatic illusion which detached
them from the deepest emotions of Jewry and robbed them of the sustaining
power of the religious regimen and religious symbolism."  In other words,
without religion, or at least religious symbolism, no Jewish ideology can
succeeded in uniting Jews.  His argument, however, does not explain why
Zionism, for example, succeeded where Yiddishism failed, even though both
movements faced a similar criticism.  Goldsmith makes no claims to
objectivity in this final chapter, but his rant against secularism seems very
out of place in an otherwise academic description of the political, social,
and cultural challenges facing those who wanted Yiddish to become the
national Jewish language.  Ironically, Hebrew became the secular, national
language of the Jews and Yiddish flourishes today in the most non-secular of
Jewish spheres - the Hasidic world.  Perhaps Goldsmith can look to those
communities in New York and Jerusalem as ones who have fused Yiddish and
religion successfully in today's world. 

David Shneer

 Originally posted to H-Judaic List - http://www.h-net.msu.edu/~judaic
 Book Review Editor: Henry Abramson <habramso@fau.edu>
 Copyright 1997 by H-Net, all rights reserved. 
 Reprinted with permission.
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 08.051

Address for the postings to Mendele: mendele@lists.yale.edu
Address for the list commands: listproc@lists.yale.edu

Mendele on the Web:

http://mendele.commons.yale.edu
http://sunsite.unc.edu/yiddish/mendele.html



