Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 1 no. 183
February 21, 1992
 
1) Klafte (Berl Hoberman)
2) Skotsl kumt (Meylekh Viswanath)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 21 Feb 1992 11:56 EST
From: Robert D Hoberman <RHOBERMAN@SBCCMAIL.BITNET>
Subject: Klafte

I might not be the only Aramaicist reading Mendele, but no
one else spoke up, so here goes.
 
It's a good bet that Yiddish klafte with its pejorative
meaning is indeed from Aramaic, because in Jewish
Palestinian Aramaic (according to Sokoloff's dictionary)
the masculine kalba meant 'dog, base person, male
prostitute'. Very likely the corresponding feminine had
similar senses, which just happen not to appear in the
extant texts.
 
But how was it pronounced?  We're all too aware that
Yiddish was pronounced differently in different times and
places, and that different words had different meanings and
uses.  Why should Aramaic have been any different?  For
Yiddish, we turn to different speakers and ask them, how do
you say this, and what does that mean.  You can't do that
for ancient Aramaic.  Information as to how Aramaic was
pronounced at any particular time and place in antiquity is
hard to come by, because it was normally written without
any vowel diacritics (pasakh, komets, etc.)  The most
consistent notation of vowels exists in Syriac, an Aramaic
language used by Middle Eastern Christians, davke, and in
Syriac the word is attested as kalbta or kalbtha.  But it
is attested only in the meaning 'forceps', not in the sense
of 'female dog' etc.  I don't know of any evidence (in
dictionaries, etc.) as to the vowels of our word in ancient
Jewish manuscripts.  So where did Bob Werman get the idea
that it should "properly" be pronounced kalb'ta?  There is
some logic to it, considering that the masculine is kalba,
but on the other hand the "absolute state" is klev, and
compare the Hebrew diminutive klavlav 'puppy'.  Forgive me,
Bob, if I'm wrong, but I bet you looked in Jastrow's
Dictionary, where it is given as kalbta (kalbso).  Where
did Jastrow get that idea?  From a SYRIAC dictionary,
without a doubt.  Jastrow also mentions the "traditional
pronunciation" klavta, which means simply that he heard
yeshiva-trained people -- no doubt Yiddish speakers -- say
it that way.  Incidentally, Jastrow mentions a few places
in Rabbinic literature where the word appears, most of them
fairly obscure, except for one: Talmud Bavli, Rosh Hashana
4a, i.e. one of the beginning pages of a commonly studied
volume.  Without having looked up that blat, I'd guess
that's precisely the place Yiddish got the word from.
 
By the way, there are still people -- Christians, Jews, and
a few Muslims and Gnostics, from  various parts of the
Middle East, mainly Kurdistan -- who speak Aramaic, and
have continuously since ancient times.  In modern Aramaic
the word is pronounced kalibta or kalipsa, in different
dialects (yes, in some the "soft" taf is pronounced s, like
in Ashkenazi Hebrew!)  This is support for an earlier
pronunciation something like kalbtha (th as in English
"thing").  It's reasonable to assume that in most varieties
of ancient Aramaic the word was something like kalbtha, but
it's certainly not impossible that it was klavta someplace,
sometime.  A similar change took place in the word for
'daughter', ancient Aramaic bartha, modern brata.
 
I never know how to answer when someone asks how a Hebrew
word SHOULD be pronounced.  If you intend to talk with
Israelis, pronounce it the way Israelis do, no problem.  If
you're davening, and you intend to talk to the
Rebeynesheleylem (I don't want to privilege Israeli, or
Yivo, pronunciation), pronounce it the way your grandfather
did.  But that's not what the questioner means, most often.
He wants to know the REAL pronunciation.  As pronounced by
whom?  Meyshe Rabeynu?  (Well, his speech wasn't so hot, so
let's say his brother Arn.)  Shleyme hamelekh?  Rebi Yehude
Ha-Nosi, of the last generation of native Hebrew speakers?
Rashi?  The Vilner Geyen?  Each of these pronounced Hebrew
differently, and there's a limit to how precisely we can
find out about how they did speak.  What about modern
Middle Eastern Jews?  Iraqi?  Moroccan? Persian?  Yemenite?
Which town in Yemen?  There's no REAL pronunciation, only
various sources of information, lines of reasoning,
sometimes conflicting conclusions.  About some most
Semitists would agree, about others not.  Why expect it to
be simple?
 
Berl

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 21 Feb 1992 14:18 EDT
From: VISWANATH@DRACO.BITNET
Subject: skotsl kumt

Skotsl kumt:
 
I believe some time ago, there was a discussion of the
phrase 'skotsl kumt'.  I just saw something in Harkavy,
which I don't think was brought up at that time; di dozike
diskusye, if memory serves revolved around cats.

Harkavy says that this term is used as a greeting mainly
for women; he derives it from 'Gots will' and says that
this refers to the brokhe that women say in the morning
'she osoni kirtsono', i.e. according to his will.

Sounds very plausible to me.

Meylekh
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol 1.183

