Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 1 no. 19
June 10, 1991
 
1) I.B.Singer and "Oyf der Elter" (Dovid-Noyekh Miller)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 10 Jun 91 15:04:02 EDT
From: David Neal Miller <dnmiller@magnus.acs.ohio-state.EDU>
Subject: "Oyf der elter" by Tse

I share the general admiration for Golda Werman's
excellent translation of Isaac Bashevis Singer's first
published work of fiction, "Oyf der elter." Perhaps
some details of its (the Yiddish original's, that is)
publication history might be of interest.

The work first appeared in the _Literarishe bleter_, 2,
whole no. 60 (26 June 1925), 4.  It is identified as a
contribution to "Undzer konkurs" [Our Contest] and is
signed "tsadik-ayin" (without the hyphen).  Leonard
Prager suggests that the signature be read "Tse," which
is certainly reasonable, though I think it equally
probable that it be read "tsadik ayin"--depending
whether the signature was author-supplied (i.e. a
pseudonym) or journal-supplied (i.e. an identifying
marker for the anonymously judged contest).  It was
reprinted in the _Forverts_ for 17 March 1935, sec. 3,
p. 3, where it bore the annotation "Tsugeshikt fun
Varshe" [Sent from Warsaw] and the signature Yitskhok
Bashevis.

The contest and the measure of Singer's success in that
contest is a tantalizing matter, and one--as we academ-
ics are wont to say--which would certainly merit fur-
ther investigation.  (My own research on Singer's
oeuvre is exhaustive only from the time of his arrival
in the States in 1935.)  Singer's story--or at least
the version of his story he elected to share with me in
September 1980--is as follows:

The _Literarishe bleter_, interbellum Poland's most
respected literary journal, invited submissions to a
contest for short belles-lettres. [The issue of genre
and generic tagging is an interesting one, especially
inasmuch as Yiddish genres do not conform with Anglo-
American ones.  Suffice it to say that, pace U.
Weinreich, Yiddish "beletristik" does _not_ bespeak
"fiction."]  Submissions were identified only on the
cover sheet; elsewhere they bore an identifier to which
the editor, but not the judges, were privy; Singer was
unclear as to whether the identifiers were suggested by
the authors or were assigned by the journal.  Since (a)
Singer was but a proofreader of limited  proofreaderly
talent, employed by the _Literarishe bleter_, and (b)
since his relationship with his older brother, at the
time also on the journal's payroll, might somehow
preclude consideration of his very un-Y.-Y.-Zinger-like
piece on its own terms, Singer seized the opportunity
to enter this atypically blindly refereed contest.  To
everyone's surprise, not the least his own, "Oyf der
elter" received the journal's first prize.  

Note that I do not assess the veracity of Singer's
report, but only the accuracy of my retelling.  Khone
Shmeruk apparently credits Singer's report (assuming
that Singer told him much the same story as he told me-
-not an entirely safe assumption, by the way) to a
certain degree, and writes that "Oyf der elter" won "a
prize" in the contest.  Perhaps a graduate student or
fraye visnshaftler would be interested in examining the
_Literarishe bleter_ for references to "Undzer
konkurs"? Publication guaranteed.

It would, finally, be of a piece were Singer actually
to have won the  first prize.  Consider his first
novel, _Der sotn in Goray_ [Satan in Goray].  Despite
Singer's later fiction-building about having been a
late bloomer, this novel was published as the first in
a series by the Yiddish P.E.N. Club in Warsaw [without
an author's subvention!],  a remarkable accomplishment
for a relatively little-known writer in the  cultural
efflorescence that was interbellum Warsaw.  Why should-
n't his  first short story have enjoyed a similar
success?

Dovid-Noyekh Miller

Internet: miller.3@osu.edu
Bitnet:   miller.3@ohstmail

______________________________________________________

End of Mendele Vol 1.19
