Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 1 no.31
June 25, 1991
 
1) Various (Mikhl Herzog}
2) Moyd un meydl (Mikhl Herzog)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 24 Jun 91  12:22 EDT
From: ZOGUR@CUVMB.BITNET

Dear Noyekh
 
1.   Of the 5 expressions you propose, only number 3
causes me to raise my eyebrows. I hesitate to say "you
won't hear it"; you obviously have. I'd like to know
where the speaker is from. There is a device, largely
in parts of Poland, as I recall, that compensates for
the loss of an old grammatical distinction between the
use of certain prepositions sometimes with the accusa-
tive, sometimes with the dative. In Modern Standard
Yiddish, ALL prepositions take the dative. Regionally,
now, we find distinctions like "er iz in hyz" but "er
geyt in hoyz arayn"; "er voynt in shtot" but er fort in
shtot arayn".  

     In any event, it's meaning is clear, although I
think the usage is questionable in this case. There is
no "motion towards" evident in the sentence. The others
sentences are perfectly acceptable. (I should say, by
the way, [or have I already said it?] that dialecto-
logical field-research demonstrates that virtually
anything you can think of, that's not completely off
the wall, you're apt to find somebody saying.
 
     As for the meaning of "es geyt im (nisht) in
lebn", I'm hard put to find anything "negative" in its
implications. It seems to me to refer to the degree of
urgency or concern that one has for the matter in
question: "es geyt mir veynik/shtark/nit
shtark/gornit/in gantsn nit in lebn".
 
2. A propos of "shum", in Lite, it's even inflected for
number: zi hot nisht keyn shumE kleyder.
 
In general, except for Sadan, I don't know of anyone
who has really done the kind of thing you're looking
for. I mentioned once that I thought that Jean Jofen
may have done some work on the Talmudic sources of some
Yiddish expressions but I don't know. Is Hebrew shum
davar really a reborrowing from Yiddish? When I'm back
in the city, I'll look it up in Even-Shoshan who often
provides some interesting comments.
 
A case in point: I was at the home of a friend in
Jerusalem some years ago and found his Sabra son chuck-
ling over a weekly humor supplement to the newspaper
Davar. I was struck by the fact that the supplement was
called "Davar akher". I asked the young man what that
meant and he was surprised that I didn't know. The
point was that he didn't know what I knew and that the
joke was on him and probably on most of the readers.
Test it at your June 27th meeting or anywhere else.
 
Harkavy glosses Yiddish "dOver-Akher" as 'pig', 'hog',
'abominable' person. As I recall, Even-Shoshan provides
a similar gloss for its use in the "safah meduberet",
i.e., presumably, in Yiddish. It goes over the heads of
most Israelis as far as I can tell. As for the general
question of Hebreisms in the safa meduberet, one should
note the view, expressed by Dovid Katz, that there is
no Hebrew component in Yiddish; that the Hebrew-origin
words in Yiddish are all derived from Aramaic. In other
words, (Jewish) Aramaic has a (distinguishable) Hebrew
component and Yiddish has an Aramaic component (which
carries with it many Hebrew-origin words). An interest-
ing idea. In any event, in many cases where the meaning
of a particular Hebrew word or phrase in Yiddish seems
to differ from its cognates in Hebrew, we often find
that the Yiddish nuances reflect the Aramaic ones. Not
surprising in view of the lernen-tradition; and, Arama-
ic was, after all, the "mother" of all our vernaculars,
the "proto-safa meduberet".
 
3. Finally, a propos of my message to Sigrid last week.
I referred to Yiddish "dos mentsh" as a dialectal form
meaning 'woman'. What surprised me some years ago was
to learn that in many places "mentsh" means 'man' only.
"Haish im hayayin": 'Der mentsh mitn vayn'. "Dort geyt
a mentsh mit tsvey froyen" ' . . . .  a man and two
women'. In such cases, Yiddish "man" means only
'husband'. More grist for the feminist mill?  
Regards to your class.
 
Mikhl

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 24 Jun 91  12:49 EDT
From: ZOGUR@CUVMB.BITNET
Subject: More on moyd and meydl

There is a true difference between "moyd" and "meydl";
"moyd" might well be glossed 'a meydl in di yorn', say,
a 'meydl of advanced years'; also 'servant'. By the
way, (even some parts of Eastern) Yiddish  know the WY
variant "maad", probably [ma:t]; (cf. the cognate
"Maat" as in Maatjes Herring!).
 ______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol 1.31

