
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 1 no. 242
May 6, 1992
 
1) Layte/leute (Ruvn-Mendl Turkel)
2) Yiddish software (Mark H. David)
3) Sid Resnick on Vergelis (Victor Bers)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 6 May 92 12:29:31 EDT
From: rmt51@cas.bitnet
Subject: RE: Mendele Vol 1.241

Margaret Mikulska writes in Mendele Vol 1.241:
 
> Doesn't -layt come straight from the German "Leute"
> people/men&women) ?
 
I hate to sound like a nit-picking pedant, but very little
Yiddish actually "comes from" German.  There are probably a
few borrowings here and there, but that's it.  Words that
are similar to German words, e.g., Y. 'layt' vs. G.
'Leute,' are cognates, i.e., words that developed in
parallel from a common linguistic source, in this case
Middle High German.  However, 'Leute' is Modern High
German, and most certainly had a different form in
Mittelhochdeutsch.
 
Saying that Yiddish words come from German demeans Yiddish
as an independent language and implies a lesser linguistic
significance than German, which we all know is not the
case.
 
Now descending from my soapbox, I remain:
 
Rick (Ruvn-Mendl) Turkel   (rmt51@cas.bitnet)   (rmt51@cas.com)
 
2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 6 May 92 14:18:30 EDT
From: gensym!mhd@harvard.harvard.edu
Subject: Computeray

Does anyone know what computer hardware/software it takes
to produce Afn Shvel (the journal of the League for
Yiddish)?  The typefaces are proper Yiddish, and look quite
nice.  There is plenty of English mixed with Yiddish, and
there are footnotes.  I would especially be pleased to
learn it, or something as good, is available at hobbyist
pricing to anyone owning a Mac with a non-postscript laser
printer.

Mark H. David

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date:     Wed, 06 May 92  14:37 EDT
From:     VBERS@YALEVM
Subject:  Relayed submission to MENDELE
 
I forward this at Sid Resnick's request:
 
Aaron Vergelis and His Role in Soviet Yiddish Literature
 
  On the subject of Aaron Vergelis, the editor for the past
30 years of the monthly Yiddish magazine in Moscow,
Sovetish Heymland, readers of Mendele may be interested to
know that the hostile view of him expressed in the recent
submissions of two list members is not unanimously shared
in Yiddish cultural circles.

   For example, the New York Forverts (April 10, 1992)
published the Yiddish text of the same letter your Bulletin
Board did from Aaron Vergelis and his editorial committee
which appealed for financial support to keep their magazine
alive under its new name, Di Yiddishe Gass.  It is
noteworthy that the Forverts editors who in the not too
distant past were themselves quite antagonistic to Mr.
Vergelis, revealed in their introductory note to his letter
that in Yiddish cultural circles there are now two
different approaches regarding him.  They cite one view
which insists that "one mustn't cooperate with him because
of the sins he committed as editor" and a contrary view
which holds that "all these sins should be forgotten and
everything ought to be done to help him and other writers
to see to it that the Yiddish language and literature shall
continue to exist and develop in the countries of the
former Soviet Union."

    Even in the pre-Gorbachev era Jewish writers and
journalists voiced differing evaluations of him.  Though
negative pronouncements on Vergelis werre numerous, there
were also more favorable estimates.  One opinion of the
latter type was offered by Prof. Wolf Moskovich in an
article in the scholarly and highly regarded journal,
Soviet Jewish Affairs, which is published in London by the
Institute of Jewish Affairs.  Prof. Moskovich wrote in
part:

    "Sovetish Heymland remains one of the best Yiddish
literary journals in the world; it maintains high standards
and is distinguished by an imaginative editorial policy
which includes the publication of ethnographic and
linguistic material of indisputable interest for the
average Yiddish reader.  We may designate the general line
of Sovetish Heymland's editorial board as 'revivalist'
since it aims at arresting the decline of Yiddish and
Yiddish cultural institutions and at preventing their
complete disappearance from the Soviet scene..." (Soviet
Jewish Affairs, Nov. 1984, page 35).

    It is true, of course, that during the period of
Brezhnev's rule Vergelis wrote some deplorable things about
Zionism and also about his critics in the Yiddish cultural
field.  Nevertheless, I believe that our judgment of him
should not only be based on these unfortunate comments that
were made during the embittered cold war period.  It is
undeniable that Vergelis as the editor since 1961 of the
only Yiddish literary magazine in the Soviet Union gathered
around it more than a hundred of the surviving Yiddish
writers, poets and cultural workers and in more recent
years nurtured a group of younger Yiddish contributors.
With circumspection and stubbornness Vergelis published
this magazine and in doing so upheld the value and esteem
of the Yiddish language and culture in Soviet society.

   I am a long time reader of Sovetish Heymland and have
often been amazed at the sheer amount and variety of
Yiddish literary expression that appeared in its pages.
All this far outweighed, in my opinion, the relatively
small number of pro-forma party-line articles which, it
seemed to me, were rendered in such a wooden Yiddish that
it was more often a trial to read any of them to the end.

    In the 25th anniversary issue of Sovetish Heymland in
August 1986 Vergelis was able to announce that it had
already published 76 novels, 109 novellas, 1,478 short
stories, 6,680 poems, 1,628 articles dealing with literary
criticism, the arts, etc.,--all in Yiddish! By any standard
this was a substantial achievement and the object of some
envy abroad.

    When I visited Vergelis in his office a year and a half
ago I spoke of the objections against him in Jewish circles
in the U.S.  I shall never forget the earnestness of his
reply: "They have no idea of the pressures we were under in
those [Brezhnev] years! But we were determined to continue
the golden chain of our literature and to keep alive the
legacy [yerushe] of our comrades who perished"--this last
an allusion to the Yiddish writers and poets who were the
victims of the Stalinist repressions.

    I am sure that Aaron Vergelis will be judged more
kindly in future years than his detractors now allow. At
any rate, Vergelis and the magazine he edits are quite
different now than they were when the cold war was going
strong.  In recent years Sovetish Heymland became more
open, more Jewish and more respect- ful of other
ideological trends in Jewish life which it had previously
maligned or ignored.  Now the magazine under a new name and
orientation seeks to maintain itself as a platform for
Yiddish literary creativity in Russia--and it is, perhaps,
the only publication there capable of being that--and thus
it deserves our attention and good wishes.
 
                                             Sid Resnick
                                             New Haven

Victor Bers
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol 1.242

Submissions: mendele@vax1.trincoll.edu

Business: nmiller@vax1.trincoll.edu

Please sign your articles.

