
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 4.264
January 6, 1995

1) Splitting the list (Ted Steiberg)
2) Splitting the list (Dovid Braun)
3) Splitting the list (Kathryn Hellerstein)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 4 Jan 1995 9:49 pm EST
From: steinberg@fredonia.edu>
Subject: Splitting the list

I would like to go on record against splitting the list.  If there's
something I don't want to read, I don't read it; but generally I learn at
least a little bit even from the densest linguistic argument. But what I
really want to say is in response to Daniella HarPaz's comment about
rudeness on the list.  It seems to be the case that critical comments on
e-mail lists are generally taken by readers to be more negative and rude
than their authors intend.  (Please don't ask me for the source of this
information 'cause I can't find it.)  There is just something about email
that makes criticism seem harsher than it is.  Consequently, it's
important to be judicious when making criticisms, and it's equally
important not to be too sensitive when reading them.

Finally, for those of us who live in small towns or far from places where
Yiddish is loved, Mendele is a wonderful community.

Ted Steinberg

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 04 Jan 1995 22:25:56 EST
From: dovid@mit.edu
Subject: Splitting the list

A few quick thoughts:

No matter how you slice it, there _is_ an anti-linguist sentiment on
Mendele; but that's not new to linguists.  Language is a thing we just
_know_, and therefore few people in the world think about it seriously
(how much time, for instance, have you spent thinking about what makes
you right- handed or left-handed? A few people spend lifetimes on things
like this, but the rest of us take them for granted). All the more so
when there is technical discussion of a language which receives
relatively little technical discussion (outside a few postings on Mendele
and an infrequent book or article).

You can't deny this sentiment, either.  It is evidenced by the fact that
quite a number of people involved in the recent discussion of Mendele
have referred to *linguistics* as the "offending" topic, as if there were
more than a half dozen linguists who actually participate in Mendele
regularly; and as if *linguistics* were actually discussed in Mendele
with any regularity.  Here and there a word or a pronunciation or an
etymology is discussed.  Rarely a linguistic analysis or technical
matter, though.  When a person asks what _fonfen_ means and a
disagreement ensues as to whether it means 'muttering into one's beard'
or 'speaking through one's nose', this is not linguistics. It is unclear
to many what linguistics actually is.  It's too great a task for me to
explain it.  But know ye, at least, what it _isn't_.

Since Mendele is the bulletin for "Yiddish Language and Culture" as its
heading indicates, people discuss pieces of the language and once in a
while a linguistic issue comes up and (usually a subset of the) half
dozen linguists talk -- to each other -- about it.  And I think it can be
said that we're very grateful to have the opportunity to do this, albeit
infrequently, so that we don't have to cc a copy to a colleague who might
not be interested in the topic; so that our discussion is archived; so
that our discussion may be read by non-linguists who have a thirst and
respect for some technical knowledge; so that we can show (albeit
modestly) that some work on Yiddish linguistics is being done.  Anyone
interested in Yiddish even in the remotest way can benefit from at least
one, if not a combination, of these facts.  An individual might not
understand what "restrictive relative clause" means, but should be happy
that Yiddish restrictive relative clauses either have been or in
principle may be discussed on Mendele.  That means we, in the broadest
sense, have discovered something about the world and about Yiddish
specifically. And a discovery about Yiddish should presumably please
every Mendelyaner, whether or not s/he understands it.

Halevay -- would that a professional (Yiddish) folklorist would pipe up
on this network, or a historian or a literary scholar/theorist or a
sociologist or a musicologist -- with material that s/he would normally
discuss in a serious forum with his/her colleagues -- or with lay people.
In actual fact, there are such people on Mendele who actively participate
or who lurk, but most of them will not discuss their fields probably
because they think the discourse would be _too technical_ for the
presumed audience.  To repeat:  since this is a bulletin whose common
denominator is a *language*, the discussion of *words* seems to take a
front seat. This, however, is _not_ *linguistic* discourse.

The tension that exists between the academic and the lay world, the
tension that exists between the literary theorist and the literary
historian, the tension that exists between the generative linguist and
the traditional linguist (to give an intra-field example), the tension
that exists between the "litvak" and the "galitsyaner" should be released
by the depression of the delete or scroll key. Patty Becker, Daniella
HarPaz and others do the correct thing by exercising this option.  Please
keep technical and non-technical discussion coming, and please keep it
respectful.  Since so many things are potentially interesting to so many
of us, let us all remain under one roof.  And let _nobody_ be dissuaded
from posting a Yiddish-related entry of interest to him/her because s/he
thinks it's potentially boring to some others.

Dovid Braun

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 5 Jan 1995 03:16:18 -0500 (EST)
From: khellers@sas.upenn.edu
Subject: The importance of cross-fertilization

Dear Friends,

To join the discussion on splitting the list, I'd like to add my two
cents -- I find the discussions about transliteration and about details
of language very interesting and even helpful, even though I am a
literature person and not a linguist.  Recently, for example, an editor
of a journal wanted to retransliterate the Yiddish passages I quoted in
an article according to that editor's sense of what the journal's readers
would recognize as Yiddish -- Chutzpah for khutspe, for instance, Shabbos
instead of shabes, tchinnes instead of tkhines...

I made an impassioned protest for the standardized system system of
transliteration that appears in Weinreich's dictionary (which we usually
call the YIVO system) -- and I used some of the eloquent arguments that
have appeared in this list.  Although I'm still not sure what the final
results of this discussion are (in terms of my article -- I have yet to
see the page proofs), I am hopeful that the YIddish in the article will
appear in transliteration that is consistent and systematic -- giving the
Yiddish text the same dignity that the English commentary surrounding it
has.

But the editor did raise a real question --  at least in my mind --
How should we spell Yiddish words that have become part of American
English when they are used within an English sentence? ( I would argue
that the Weinreich/YIVO system prevail -- but what about words that have
made it into the American dictionary?  My Websters 7th NEw COllegiate
Dictionary (already not so new, circa 1970!) has: "schnorrer [Yiddish
shnorer] beggar; esp: one who wheedles others into supplying his wants".

This technical question of transliteration leads to larger questions
about language and culture -- is "schnorrer" English while "shnorer" is
Yiddish?  If so, what is the difference between the two words?  How is
each understood in its own language context?  I think that I, as a
literature person, might have some different answers than my friends who
are linguists --  or at least I'd  go about answering the question in a
different way.  (can't do in now, though -- have to get off the phone
line) .

Please, folks, don't split the list -- let's just open up the
discussion -- use our various resources to  explore YIddish more fully!

al dos guts,

Kathryn Hellerstein

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 4.264

Mendele has 2 rules:

	1. Provide a meaningful Subject: line
	2. Sign your article (full name please)

A Table of Contents is now available via anonymous ftp, along with weekly
updates.

Anonymous ftp archives available on:
          ftp.mendele.trincoll.edu
          in the directory pub/mendele/files

Archives available via gopher on:
        gopher.cic.net

Send articles to:
        mendele@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

Send change-of-status messages to:
        listserv@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

        a. For a temporary stop: set mendele nomail
        b. To resume delivery: set mendele mail
        c. To subscribe: sub mendele first_name last_name
        d. To unsubscribe kholile: unsub mendele

Other business:
        nmiller@mail.trincoll.edu



