
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 4.191
November 20, 1994

1) Spelling (Arn Abramson)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sat, 19 Nov 94 23:52:48 EST
From: abramson@uconnvm.uconn.edu
Subject: Spelling

Since the 13th of November other pressures have kept me from commenting
on the several interesting responses to my remarks about ways of writing
the Yiddish "redt (ret), bistu (bist du), hostu (host du), onnemen
(onemen)."

Meylekh Viswanath (14 Nov.) actually joins me in expressing bewilderment
over inconsistencies in applying the principles of transcription versus
those of transliteration. Mikhl Herzog (13 Nov.) elaborated on the
question by bringing in other examples of homophones that are spelled
differently in both Yiddish script and in YIVO writing. Unfortunately,
before going to the trouble of  giving me undeserved credit for
historical thoughts on early /bis du/ rather than /bist du/ he could not
have seen my confession of an oversight (also 13 Nov.) in failing to
write "bist." Actually, however, I found Mikhl's thoughts  along these
historical lines very interesting indeed. (He also wrung my heart for a
moment with his relevant reminder of a speech mannerism of our late
teacher and friend Uriel Weinreich.)

I think, Mikhl, we do have to go back to our synchronic stage of the
language for our discussion.  (By the way, it would be interesting to
know whether there was variation in scribal  practices in writing all
these words in Yiddish literature before the standardization of the
orthography.) Phonetically, the form /bistu/, as has been pointed out by
Rick Turkel (14 Nov.), represents assimilation of the final /t/ of /bist/
and the initial /d/ of /du/. This is not surprising because in casual
speech maintaining of the full forms would require  releasing of the
articulation for the final /t/ and then making the lingual closure again
to produce the initial /d/. The melding of the two homorganic (=produced
at the same place of articulation) consonants yields a single consonant,
which, in the context of preceding /s/, loses its aspiration; the result
is neither a normal /d/ as in isolated /du/ nor a normal /t/, as in
isolated /tu/, where it is aspirated (=noisy span of turbulent air before
the onset of voice from the vocal folds). This resulting stop consonant
is conventionally treated as "voiceless," even though there is no
conmtrast between /d/ and /t/ (or /b/ and /p/ and /g/ and /k/) in this
context.

What bothers Meylekh and me in such spellings is that Mikhl's principle
of morpheme-preservation in writing is observed in words like "redt" but
not in expressions like "bistu" and "hostu." The discussion is
complicated by an observational disagreement between Mikhl Herzog and
Arre Komar (13 Nov.) Mikhl agrees with me that the words "redt" '(he)
speaks' and "ret" '(he) rescues' are homophones (pronounced the same),
which is what Meylekh and I believe. Arre, however, says, "I notice that
when I speak I make a clear distinction between redt and ret. The former
ending is slightly  softer and more d-like than the latter."  In a
private message Shleyme Axelrod asked me whether such a claim could be
tested by means of spectrograms.  Let me give you my answer to him with,
I hope, some improvement. Statements such Arre's are often made by
literate folk under the influence of the orthographic vagaries of their
cultures' writing systems. It would be as if some English speaker said
that there is just a very small difference between "night" and "knight."
(Of course, there was a very real difference beteen them, I dare say, in
Old English and presumably Proto-Germanic.) If Brother Arre has fallen
victim to this phenomenon and simply imagines a difference between the
two words, he will have to be seized and purged of his sin.

If, however, Arre is right, it follows that we have made an important
discovery about the consonant system of Yiddish! There are three forms:
/ret/ 'rescues,' /red/ 'speak,' and, let us say, /reD/ 'speaks.' That is,
Yiddish has not only /d t/ but also some third stop consonant in contrast
with both of them, that is  "a little softer and more d-like" than /t/; I
label his sound /D/.

I said to Shleyme that before doing an instrumental investigation of the
matter,  we would have to determine that the three categories actually
exist in the  production and perception of native speakers. We would have
a few native speakers record several instances each of "ikh red," "er
redt," and "er ret." It is absolutely vital that they _not_ be told the
purpose of the exercise. Thus, it would be best to mix a number of other
short items into the list. (We would want to keep track of what dialects
of Yiddish we were recording.) Removing the pronouns from the recordings,
we would randomize the tokens of the key words and play them to a jury of
native speakers, including our informants, for labeling in Yiddish
script. If Arre is right, three statistically significant categories will
arise from the data. Then we can examine sound spectrograms or other
instrumental displays to determine the differentiating phonetic
properties.

Finally, there is the matter of the spelling of the end of one morpheme
and the beginning of the next one with the same consonant letter whether
or not this reflects true consonant length (gemination). Dovid Braun,
who first called the matter to our attention, has added (14 Nov.),"After
composing my entry on double consonants, I reread it and took a
double-take, realizing that, as it stood, I was claiming what Arn
Abramson says I claim.  And after intuiting a bit and thinking back to
the Yiddish linguistic literature I've read that touches on the matter,
I was satisfied with my claim: normal spoken Yiddish has a phonological
(postlexical, if you will) rule of degemination.  Wherever you have two
like consonants meeting, pronounce the sequence as if there were only
one.  "madam meyerson" is syllabified as [ma.da.me.yer.son]; "onnemen"
is syllabified as [o.ne.men]. In "careful speech", a speaker might
lengthen the consonant for purposes of disambiguation or phonetically
preserving the integrity of each morpheme, but in casual speech, this is
lost categorically." He goes on to give a note on Soviet spelling. I
cannot argue with him, as my only knowledge of usage may be based on
careful, deliberate speech. If he is right, of course, Meylekh and I
will have to resign ourselves to further exceptions to the principles of
transcription. What we seem to have in both Yiddish writing and YIVO
writing is neither a  pure transcription nor a pure transliteration. It
is roughly a roman transcription that, with some troubling exceptions
(e.g., /bistu/), preserves information about morpheme boundaries.
Curiously, in Hebrew-Aramaic words Yiddish writing is normally pure
transliteration, while in YIVO writng it is transcription of the
pronunciation

Yiddish (Semitic spelling)                YIVO       Gloss
shin-beyz-sov                           shabes        'Sabbath'
mem-nun-khes                            minkhe        'afternoon
                                                        service'
khes-sov-langer nun                     khosn         'bridegroom'

Arn Abramson

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 4.191

Mendele has 2 rules:

	1. Provide a meaningful Subject: line
	2. Sign your article (full name please)

A Table of Contents is now available via anonymous ftp, along with weekly
updates.

Anonymous ftp archives available on:
          ftp.mendele.trincoll.edu
          in the directory pub/mendele/files

Archives available via gopher on:
        gopher.cic.net

Send articles to:
        mendele@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

Send change-of-status messages to:
        listserv@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

        a. For a temporary stop: set mendele nomail
        b. To resume delivery: set mendele mail
        c. To unsubscribe kholile: unsub mendele

Other business:
        nmiller@mail.trincoll.edu



