
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 2 no. 200
May 13, 1993

1) Coffee talk (Paul Weichsel)
2) Plurals (Ellen Prince)
3) Yiddish spelling conventions (Mikhl Herzog)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed May 12 14:56:12 1993
From: Paul Weichsel <weichsel@symcom.math.uiuc.edu>
Subject: Coffee Talk

My reaction to Gerald M. Phillips' inquiry is the
following.

1. My mother used to say on special occassions: Oy,
der hartz vert mir ferklempt, meaning that she felt a
constricting pressure around her heart, meaning that
she was feeling very distressed.

2. As far as "konnektekezoink" is concerned, I guess
that it is a product of one of the shows more
imaginative writers.

3. Is "Coffee Talk" good for the Jews? It provides
some hillarious moments for this particular Jew and I
am delighted to see it on the airwaves. Yasher koiach
Saturday Night Live!

P. Weichsel

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed May 12 16:48:30 1993
From: "Ellen F. Prince" <ellen@central.cis.upenn.edu>
Subject: Plurals

on the nar/naronim, dokter/doktoyrim, shabes/shabosim
thing: it's not unlike modern english dive/dove, where
the 'historical' past tense would be (and still is for
some) dived but where it was recategorized as being in
the drive/drove, strive/strove verb class. when the
change goes the other way, we call it 'regularization';
when it goes this way (from less marked to more marked,
i mean), we chuckle...

p.s. mikhl, thanks for poyerim--i always forget that
one.

ellen prince

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu May 13 02:28:27 1993
From: ZOGUR@CUVMB.Columbia.edu
Subject: Yiddish spelling conventions

Meylekh, my earlier comments were apparently unclear. I
hope the following ones don't add to the confusion.

   Let me elaborate somewhat on matters of Yiddish
spelling conventions. Indulge me if I ramble a while
and belabor the obvious. Perhaps I don't really have to
establish the relevance of pre-Yiddish traditions for
an understanding of some Yiddish spelling conventions.
Still, it helps me to ramble so, perhaps it will be of
some help to you too.

     Like other Jewish languages, Yiddish uses the
Hebrew or, if you prefer, the Jewish alphabet. It
inherited the letters and many of the conventions
associated with them, perhaps indirectly from Hebrew,
more directly from Aramaic, and in some manner from
other Jewish language forebears as well, certainly from
Judeo-French. The earliest dated, connected Yiddish
text, for example, (the rhymed couplet in the Worms
makhzer, dated 1272: "gut tak im betaGe sver dis
maxazor in beth hakneseth traGe" (in which G is
probably the fricative counterpart of [g]), already
displays well developed spelling conventions, and
apparently has a Judeo-French parallel: "bon dzhor(e)**
. . ." etc.

     There is much to be learned from how the letters
were first used (and not used). Hebrew-origin words
retained their traditional spelling, except where their
origin was somehow obscured, as in the case of "mekn"
(to erase). Some letters were never used for non-Hebrew
words, or in positions in which Hebrew spelling
conventions (which may have reflected Hebrew phonology)
precluded them from occurring.

     Unlike today, "samekh" for example, occurred only
in Hebrew words. The [s] sound was represented by
"sin". This surely had something to do with the
historical difference between "samekh" and "sin" and
the manner in which they corresponded to the "eses" of
the corterritorial, non-Jewish languages.

     Unlike today, the [x] sound in word-initial
position was represented by "khes", never by "khof"
which, unlike "khes", was precluded from occuring in
that position. in Hebrew. In the 19th century, Mendele
is still writing "khotsh" and "khlebn" with "khes".

     For the same reason, "vov", not "fey" represented
word-initial [f] although, I must admit that, at some
point, the system may have gotten messed up by the use
of "veyz" for initial [f], What can you do?

     I view the use of alef in Yiddish against this
background of Hebrew-origin constraints. Except for
[e], every word-initial vowel in Yiddish is either
represented by alef [a, o], or preceeded by alef [i, u,
ey, ay, oy]. My explanation is that Hebrew words (with
an exception that I can't explain ##), unlike words in
Yiddish  never begin with a vowel sound. They do begin
with alef and ayin but these are, historically,
consonants. In Yiddish, both alef and ayin lost their
consonantal value and were thus freed, in the case of
the word-initial, so-called shtumer-alef, to serve a
strictly orthographic (dummy consonantal) function and,
in the case of ayin, to represent [e]. Why [e]? Perhaps
there is some phonetic explanation. (In Western
Yiddish, ayin often represents [e, e:] in Hebrew-origin
words, too: sho 'hour(s)' is [she:], moes "money" is
[me:s].

     I think you quetioned my explanation for the
traditional use of the shtumer alef in spelling such
words as "yid", and "yidish" on the grounds that
initial "yud" has a consonantal function in Hebrew and
thus could have/should have? been carried over into the
non-Hebrew component of Yiddish as well. The fact that
it wasn't, if it wasn't, does not however, invalidate
what I've said about the origin of the word-iniitial
shtumer alef convention.

     As to why this convention was applied in the case
of [yid/yidish/yingl] when consonantal "yud" was
available, we probably have to look elsewhere, perhaps
to the dominance/"prestige" of the Litvish variants
[id/idish/ingl].

     Wasn't there actually a newspaper called "Der Jud"
(spelled "yud", "vov", "daled")? The preferred form,
before modern spelling reform, became "Der Id" (spelled
"alef", "yud", "daled"). By the way,the three words in
question, yield three systems: i)   a yid [a yid/ayid]
-- der/dem yid ii)  a id-- der/dem id iii) a-y-id
[ayid]--der id

-----------------------------------------------
** spelled "yud", "vov", "reysh", ("alef")
## udvar adonay/unsane toykef

Mikhl Herzog
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol 2.200

