
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 5.125
September 29, 1995

1) Mendelyaner vs. Mendelnik (Zellig Bach)
2) Rosh Khavruse (Zellig Bach)
3) Sukkes song query (Shulamith Berger)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 26 Sep 1995 17:15:36 -0400
From: zellig@aol.com
Subject: Mendelyaner vs. Mendelnik

Naming is an important and significant human function.  What we name and
call ourselves is equally important and significant.

In a recent post (5.112,5) Morrie Feller asked whether members on our
list are called Mendelyaners or "is it Mendelniks?"  The answer is:
Mendelyaners.

_Rationale for this preference_:

"Mendelnik" sounds as if the pseudonym of the writer whose name we honor
was not _Mendele [Moykher Sforim]_ (Mendele the book seller), but Mendel,
without the final /e/ and with an added -nik suffix.  To refer to him
this way is an inadvertent disrespect.

Shortly after I joined Mendele, and seeing the name "Mendelnik" or
"Mendelniks," it occurred to me to submit a short post with the subject
title "In Defense of the Final /e/ in Mendele." However, the name
"Mendelenik" or "Mendeleniks," with all three /e's/ included -- a
four-syllable word with the accent still on the first syllable -- did not
sound right.  I therefore coined the name "Mendelyaner" and started using
it in my posts.  I am happy to say that it gained a goodly measure of
acceptance, as evidenced in a number of carefully crafted posts in our
volumes.

Shleyme Axelrod, my good friend and khaver Mendelyaner, already touched
upon this problem in his post "vi heysn mir" [what do we call ourselves]
many months ago (3.030,4).  He too remarked that if we call ourselves
"Mendelniks", the final /e/ in the writer's name is missing.

_The name Mendl_:

The Yiddish diminutive of a name, as well as of other words, is usually
formed by the addition of a final lamed /l/, for example Avreml, Dovidl,
Khayiml.  But when the name ends with a nun /n/, it is formed by the
addition of daled _and_ lamed /dl/, for example Sheyndl, Zalmendl, Zundl.

The name Mendl (in the old spelling Mendel) is the diminutive of _man_
[male, husband], and serves two functions:  as the name of a person and,
to a much lesser extent, as the description for a short man.

Mendl also means hook, and hook and eye (a small metal hook and loop for
fastening a dress) are called in Yiddish "mendl un vaibl.".

This suggests, psychoanalytically speaking, that Jewish women who named
hook-and-eye "mendl and vaibl" -- husband and wife! -- unconsciously
perceived in its action a metaphor symbolizing coital union.

I genuinely trust that no one will jump to the conclusion that by making
this comment I have blemished and marred the sainted memory of our
mothers and grandmothers.  This would be like the reaction of children
who, in the blush of their adolescence, do not allow themselves to accept
the fact that their parents, especially their mothers, engaged in a
sexual act.  (The last sentence is more applicable to times bygone;
adolescents nowadays are greatly more sophisticated.)

_The suffix -nik_:

The suffix -nik is very productive in Yiddish, and words with -nik
probably exist in the hundreds.  Just three examples to demonstrate its
range: 'Hultaynik' [one who lives an irresponsible life];  'kolboynik' [a
rascal, also a Jack of all trades]; and 'Lamedvovnik' [one of the
thirty-six saintly men].

But when the suffix -nik is borrowed from the Yiddish and transliterated
in English, it has a different character.  It parallels the connotations
of the Yiddish words with -nik that had already gained popular acceptance
in English, such as 'nudnik,'  'alrightnik,'  'no-goodnik,' all with
negative meanings.  In a similar vein were the relatively new coinages
'beatnik' and 'peacenik,' again with a dismissive tone of detraction.
There is thus no need to "shlep"-in the suffix -nik into the name for the
members of our khavruse.  (For a further discussion of the -nik suffix,
see the book by Sol Steinmets:  _Yiddish and English -- A Century of
Yiddish in America_, pp. 65 - 66).

_The suffix -yaner_:

1.  The -yaner suffix is also productive in Yiddish, but to a much, much
smaller degree than the above-discussed -nik. The suffix -yaner, or
(a)ner, serves as a geographic indicator, for instance Amerikaner,
Mexikaner, Galitsyaner;  also as the collective name for devotees to and
proponents of a specific scientific or philosophical system of thinking,
such as Freudyaner, Hegelyaner, Kantyaner.

2.  In Warsaw of pre-World War I a number of secular young Jews would
gather some evenings in the home of Yud Lamed (Yitskhok Leybush) Perets
to listen to him talk on various social problems in Jewish life, on art,
the lore of the people, etc.  Sometimes he would also read to them of his
work.

Some of them aspiring to become writers read to him of their own work,
for his criticism and, especially, for his approval.  One of these young
men was the poet Avrohom Reyzn, and Perets generally approved of his
poetry and short stories and was very encouraging.

This group of his devotees were then known as _Peretsyaner_.

3.  Many American Jews, when reminiscing about their childhood and
adolescence years spent in the secular Yiddish-conscious summer camp
Boyberik (N.Y.), call themselves, in the glow of youthful pleasant
memories, _Boyberikaner_.  [Boyberik was a town in Poland, near Lvov.  In
Sholem Aleykhem's works, however, Boyberik obtained a humorous
connotation, possibly based on the Yiddish expression "farforn in
Boyberik," that is got off on a tangent, hopelessly "farblondzhet"
[lost].

4.  The suffix -yaner is also used to designate a large family clan,
after the name of a central paternal or maternal figure.  Such is Moyshe
Kulbak's prose work with the title _Zelmenyaner_, a book about loves,
generational conflicts, and so on.  (Four volumes of all of Kulbak's
works are being prepared for publication by the Yiddish faculty of the
Hebrew University in Jerusalem.  Kulbak was one of the martyrs during
Stalin's pogrom on Jewish intellectuals, writers, and poets.)

_Mendelyaner as a collective and singular name_:

The term Mendelyaner is thus safely grounded as a proper construction in
Yiddish, and attests to the homage and tribute we pay the "grandfather"
of the modern Yiddish literature.  And while it does not incorporate the
"third /e/" in Mendele's name, it rids our name of the appendage of a
weak -nik.  I therefore humbly recommend it as a collective name for our
group, as well as for each individual member.

Zellig Bach
Lakehurst, NJ

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 26 Sep 1995 17:16:22 -0400
From: zellig@aol.com
Subject: Rosh Khavruse

Our Noyekh Miller, Mendele's moderator, refers to himself in unbecoming
modesty as "shames."  I believe this is a totally inappropriate title.

The position of shames was in most cases, and very likely still is, a
menial and lowly one in the synagogue.  If we are to apply a title from
besmedresh life, it would be more appropriate to refer to him as ga'be
(rhymes with aderabe [why not?  By all means!]).

In some posts in _Mendele_,  as well as in several personal
communications, I referred to him as "rosh khavruse,"  rosh being
Yiddish-Hebrew for head of, and khavruse a learning society, as I
perceive the group of Mendele members.

A very good friend of mine, a polyglot (active knowledge of at least ten
languages), called my attention to the fact that since the word
"khavruse" is Aramaic, it should be "reysh khavruse" ("reysh" spelled
reysh, yud, shin) and not "rosh-khavruse", since "rosh" is a Hebrew
component in Yiddish and should therefore come with another Hebrew
component, such as Rosh Yeshi've.

Since the term "rosh" is more current in Yiddish than the Aramaic
"reysh," as, for instance, in rosh khoydesh (the beginning of the month),
rosheshone (the beginning of the new year on the Jewish calendar), and
_be'rosh_ (at the head of), I think we might go ahead with rosh khavruse,
pending Noyekh's approval.  Both Alexander Harkavy and Uriel Weinreich
list in their dictionaries  more  than  ten  noun  combinations  with
rosh-.  [Note:  Do not confuse "be'rosh" with Yiddish "brosh" -- brooch.]

I imagine that Noyekh will object to this change of title, but we
Mendelyaner, being an absolute majority, can override his veto...  What
do other Mendelyaner think about it?

Zellig Bach
Lakehurst, NJ

[Since in the real world real shamosim are sometimes as learned as the
rov and may even have smikhe, shames may already be too high. Our good
Zellig's proposed promotion to gabe or rosh khavruse is out of the
question but declined with gratitude.  Subject closed. nm]

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 27 Sep 1995 11:34:58 -0400 (EDT)
From: sberger@yu1.yu.edu
Subject: Sukkes song query

I am trying to find the words to a song with the line "a sukele a
kleyne." Any help will be greatly appreciated.

Shulamith Berger

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 5.125

