
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 3.054
July 10, 1993

1) Jews of the Caucasus (Gerald M. Phillips)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue Jun 29 20:52:42 1993
From: <GMP%PSUVM.bitnet@YaleVM.YCC.Yale.Edu>
Subject: A noteworthy news story

This was sent to me by a friend.  It may be of interest.

washington, june 28 (special) - the following article by Fred
Haitt appeared Sunday in the Washington Post:

NIUGDI, Russia--In her tin-roofed, two-room shack in this
isolated village near the Caspian Sea, Turunj Khananayeva
carefully keeps her matzoh dry above a stove and hangs over her
front door a small beaded bag containing a Hebrew prayer.

Khananayeva, 74, a longtime Communist Party worker on the
collective farm here, knows little about Judaism. But like her
ancestors before her for more than 2,000 years, Khananyeva has
preserved biblical customs dating back to the ancient destruction
of the First Temple.

Khananayeva is a Mountain Jew, one of perhaps 50,000 who until
recently lived unassimilated in the villages and ancient cities
of the rugged Caucasus mountain regions of Russia and Azerbaijan.
Long after Hitler wiped out the shes and ghettoes of Eastern
Europe, the Mountain Jews continued to maintain their segregated
lifestyle here, celebrating Passover without knowing why, living
in all-Jewish villages and naming their children after Jews who
wandered in the desert with Moses.

Today, more than half of these Jews, who say they have lived here
since the Assyrians destroyed Jerusalem's First Temple in 722
B.C., have left for Israel, and 700 more leave each month.

Soon this last pocket of unassimilated Jewry will be gone, along
with the language that Khananayeva knows simply as "Jewish"--a
version of Persian mixed with ancient Hebrew terms.

"As a scholar, you may feel sorry about this," said Baruch Gur,
who handles emigration from the former Soviet Union and Eastern
Europe for the Jewish Agency in Israel. "As a Jew, I am very
happy."

Their exodus is part of a massive emigration of Jews from the
former Soviet Union to Israel, which grew from 13,000 in 1989 to
185,000 in 1990 and 148,000 in 1991.

Last year, because of unemployment and crowded housing in Israel,
the number dropped to 64,500, and only 20,000 left for Israel
during the first five months of this year, according to the
Jewish Agency's Moscow spokesman, Avraham BenYakov. About the
same number of Jews leave for the United States, Canada, Germany
and other countries combined, he said.

But more than half of those leaving now come from Central Asia
and the Caucasus, where political instability and fears of ethnic
discrimination have accelerated the exodus. More than 80 percent
of Tajikistan's Jews have left, as well as perhaps 70 percent of
Caucasian Jews like Khananayeva, Ben-Yakov said.

On a recent Saturday morning, a dozen or so Jewish men prayed in
the lone remaining synagogue of Derbent, where Oriental carpets
line the floor and women are not welcome. Many more elderly Jews
sat outside on the sidewalks of Lenin Street, the heart of the
Jewish quarter, hawking books and light bulbs to raise funds to
emigrate, or simply to survive.

Nami Danilova, 66, sat on a bench in the shade of an acacia tree
offering to sell a pair of shoes, some long-playing records and
the childhood piano exercise books once used by her daughter, who
left for Israel last year.

"My daughter says, 'Come, come!' " Danilova said. "But I have no
money. How can I go?"

Danilova would like to leave, not because of antisemitism, but
because life has grown more difficult for her, as for many
Russians, in recent years. Her apartment has been robbed twice,
she said, and inflation makes it impossible for her to eat
decently.

Other Mountain Jews, such as historian Gennadi Sosunov, want to
fulfill what they believe is their historical destiny to return
to the land of their ancestors. Sosunov, 35, said his
Soviet-educated generation received no religious training but
spoke "Jewish" at home, celebrated Purim and looked favorably
upon Zionism.

"This is our homeland, and Israel is our homeland too," Sosunov
said.

But David Davidov, 35, like his father a rabbi in Derbent, said
he will not leave as long as some Jews remain. "For centuries,
we've been here," Davidov said as services concluded. "How can we
throw all this away, this synagogue, these people? If we move to
Israel, we will lose our language and everything else."

Historians believe that some of the Mountain Jews' ancestors were
brought from Israel as captives by the Assyrians, others by the
babylonians after the Second Temple's destruction in 586 B.C.
They lived in Persia and gradually migrated north toward the
Caucasus.

Here, the harsh climate and topography helped isolate them and
preserve their customs, just as 28 other nationalities with
distinct languages have survived here in the mountainous Russian
province of Daghestan alone. During the Middle Ages, legends
circulated in Europe about the lost tribes of Israel imprisoned
in the Caucasian mountains.

More than a century ago, Russian scholar Yuda Chorny traveled
among the Mountain Jews and found a fascinating mixture of
ancient biblical customs and adaptations to surrounding Muslim
culture and belief.

Few Mountain Jews, Chorny reported in 1870, could understand
Hebrew or explain Jewish religion. Yet they favored ancient
Hebrew names--such as Gamlil, Yoav and Shulamit--and used Hebrew
letters to write their Persian-like language.

Hosts washed guests' feet, as in biblical times, Chorny reported.
Gravestones gave the year of death according to the ancient
Hebrew calendar. And although their houses resembled those of
Muslim mountain-dwellers in neighboring villages, only the Jews
washed the floors and walls every Friday, before the traditional
Jewish Sabbath.

Despite decades of anti-religious pressure from Soviet
authorities, the same mix of ancient custom and local influence
has persisted. The Jews of Daghestan were saved during World War
Ii when the Nazi advance was halted in Nalchik, in the nearby
northern Caucasus.

How many remain is uncertain. Many sought to evade Soviet
antisemitism by registering as "Tats," a mountain tribe that
speaks a Persian-like language but follows Islam.

"Previously, Jews said they were Tats so they could get into
universities," Sosunov said. "Now, Tats call themselves Jews so
they can get into Israel."

Before he leaves for Israel, Sosunov wants to complete
photographing cemeteries in Mountain Jewish villages. Many are
ghost towns now, and only the Hebrew lettering on mossy, tilting
gravestones proves Jews once lived there.

In Khananayeva's village, the Jewish population has dwindled from
hundreds to about 10 families. After living in her little house
without running water virtually all her life, she has no desire
to move. But her daughter, Liza Davidova, 40, thinks the time has
come. "And if I go, she'll come with me," Davidova said

Gerald M. Phillips

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 3.054
