
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 3.168
December 15, 1993

1) A little more on word order (Reyzl Kalifowicz-Waletzky)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue Dec 14 15:59:29 1993
From: Roslyn Kalifowicz-Waletzky <0005943838@mcimail.com>
Subject: Re: a little more on word order

        All those who disagree with the Bermans, please forgive me
for taking a little more time to embellish on a point about word
order to any other lurking beginners still confused by all this
arguing. Since I got an expected "unfriendly" letter from one
Berman (among several thank you notes), I figure they may be other
people out there who also still don't get it.  Yesterday's letter
from Marnen Laibow-Koser proves that.  So bear with me while I
reproduce an edited copy of parts of my personal response to Jason
Berman.

        "I spent the time writing that Mendele essay, not only
because the argument has created too much confusion and needless
animosity (on- and off-line), but because I recognize that
ayngeshpartkayt.  It reminds of the dead-end conclusions I sometimes
fell into at the beginning of my Yiddish teaching career (1971) when
I tried to fit my dogmatic reading of Weinreich's stated rules to my
own native Yiddish, because I began teaching Yiddish a year and a
half before I formally studied Yiddish linguistics. (That as well as
this whole discussion here would make an interesting
psycholinguistic study.)  Then I finally got to question my teacher
Mordkhe Shaechter about terms like "always", "sometimes", "only in
some dialects", etc. in "College Yiddish".   So my writing is partly
out of sympathy for a kind of blind aynkeshpartkayt about some
linguistic issue I remember once falling into myself in the early
1970's.

        The issue here is really a semantic quibble, but of the type
that completely thwarts correct classification and the nature of two
very important categories at hand, namely, what is correct Yiddish
and what isn't.  You are obviously not a linguist and that's
perfectly o.k.  I never primarily identify myself as one despite my
degree.   But I will try to reclarify one small point again.

        My husband tells me that, for at least the last 30 years,
linguists have understood that what is out of the norm is not
necessarily outside of grammar.  Bill Labov's milestone study about
Black English being a non-standard rather than a substandard dialect
is what honed this point home.  Although we are comparing 2 very
different things, the argument here reminds me of that substandard
vs. non-standard issue.  Your statement that verb-first sentences
are out of the norm is correct.  The verb position is without
question out of the norm and that is what makes it special,
different or, to use a linguistic term. "marked".  But what you
don't understand is that the difference between such sentences and
normal word order sentences is not random.   When you claim that it
is ungrammatical, you imply that the word order is random.  The
verb-first sentences cited to you still conform to very strict
rules.  And those rules are part of the repertoire available within
the normal, regular rules of Yiddish grammar. An out of the norm
Yiddish sentence can have scores of possible variations (look at
lesson 11 and see how you can jumble all the sentence units). But
the point is that of all possible combinations, only one is
possible.  The verb is limited to only one alternate position and
everything else in that sentence, e.g., pronouns, subject phrase,
object, nisht, etc., still has to follow the rules of normal word
order.   Those rules are very strict and no "poetic license" is
allowed here.  Poetic license in poetry, for example, gives you many
more variations than mere inverted word order.  On a continuum of
grammatical rules, inverted word order is to be found right next to
regular word order and poetic license is on the opposite end.

        While poetic license may include inverted word order, it
isn't limited to it.  Poetic license may operate outside of Yiddish
grammar. Perhaps putting it this way may help.  As a category,
inverted word order is an overlapping category that falls into the
category of Yiddish grammar and into the category of poetic license.
While poetic license may borrow inverted word order, inverted word
order resides within the category of Yiddish grammar and not in the
category of poetic license.

        You have often called use of this word order a deviation
from natural speech and as such it is/should be considered
creativity.  I say yes; this linguistic feature is itself without
doubt a very skillful, clever, and creative narrative and rhetorical
device.  Its use, however, is so commonplace in both colloquial
speech and narrative forms that it alone does not render discourse
"artistic" or "creative".

        I DO understand your concern about Yiddish students no
longer taking normal word order seriously when they see the kind of
argument many of us are making here.  But I would not make it if I
thought a beginner student could not handle hearing about it at the
point of Lesson 11 with the proper explantion.  The fact is that
there are more permissible types of verb-first constructions than
imperatives and questions.  Producing these kinds of sentences in
their CORRECT CONTEXT is more difficult than you realize, but I
assure you that you could recognize incorrect word order from the
grammatically correct verb-first sentences that we are talking
about.  I would not teach this use to first-year students but I
would not hesitate to point it out either at the proper occasion.

BTW:   Although he has long left linguistics, my husband is still
considered THE expert on Yiddish syntax.  In fact, I was recently
told that the whole reading list for a course on Yiddish syntax at
Hebrew U. 2 years ago consisted of one item-- his "Topicalization"
article.  He has looked over everything I have written on this topic
on Mendele, and he has corrected very little.

Nu, ikh hob geton mayns un mer ken ikh nisht.

--------------------------------

I just read in a TV listing that there is going to be a program
about the history of Yiddish tonight on PBS-Channel 13 at 8:00 PM
New York time. Check you time slots.

Reyzl

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 3.168

Mendele has 2 rules:

	1. Provide a Subject: line.
	2. Sign your article.

Send submissions/responses to:

        mendele@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

Other business:

        nmiller@starbase.trincoll.edu

Anonymous ftp archives available on:

        ftp.mendele.trincoll.edu
        in the directory pub/mendele/files




