
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 5.160
November 1, 1995

1) Standards, written yiddish, and resources (Khayem Bochner)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Wed, 01 Nov 95 11:06:53 -0500
From: bochner@das.harvard.edu
Subject: Standards, written yiddish, and resources

I'm going to try to tie together several different things here, so please
be patient.

I'll start with a story, about myself. I became fascinated by languages
as a teenager. I taught myself Esperanto, a substantial amount of Latin,
a little Greek, etc, all from library books. If I had started learning
Yiddish then, while I still had daily access to fluent, dialectal
Yiddish, my Yiddish would be much better than it is.  But I didn't.
Wasn't I interested? On the contrary, I learned to read Yiddish from the
introduction to Harkavy (1898) (the one Yiddish book we had in the
house), and I remember looking at a Yiddish translation of Shakespeare in
the Jewish Center library. But I didn't get very far, given my limited
knowldge. And it _never occurred_ to me that such a thing as a textbook
of Yiddish might exist.

Why not? I'll come back to this.

Now I'd like to talk a little bit about written Yiddish. Real written
Yiddish, that is, oyf yidishe oysyes. Many of you probably know that
bitter battles have been found over Yiddish spelling, and I don't mean to
minimize their importance. But for my current purposes it's more
interesting to look at something that all the major spelling systems all
have in common.

My point is this: conventional written Yiddish doesn't reflect the spoken
dialects. And I'm not referring to Yivo publications here. I'm talking
about the hasidic press as well as secular. (Unless there's been a
dramatic change in the last year or two, and I doubt it.)

What do I mean? Well, most dialects pronounce the word for 'good' as
"git". But the newspapers consistently write it as giml, vov, tes, i.e.
"gut". Or take 'and'. In most dialects it's "in", pronounced just like
the preposition "in". But in writing there's a difference: alef vov nun
versus alef yud nun.

And writing doesn't just enforce artificial distinctions, it also ignores
real distinctions. Most dialects distinguish the preposition "nukh"
("nuuekh" in my dialect) 'after' from the adverb "nokh" 'still'. But
they're both written nun, komets alef, khof.

Now, those details happen to match litvish Yiddish. But of course the
newspapers write "groys" (vov yud), not "greys" (yud yud), so they aren't
writing Litvish either.

In fact, returning to an earlier topic, they write things that don't
reflect any widespread dialect: "oyf" in particular.

Now notice that all these details match 'standard' Yiddish. Have the
nasty academics infiltrated the hasidic press? Khas vekholile!

The fact is this: Yiddish spelling wasn't invented yesterday. And not in
1930, or in 1800, either. It has evolved gradually, under a variety of
influences, over hundreds of years. And spelling is very conservative.
There is tremendous resistance to change.

As a matter of fact, the spelling reforms adopted by Yivo and Tsisho in
the twenties and thirties were primarily directed toward making writing
reflect the spoken language better. (No one pronounces a 'hey' in
"geht".) And there's _still_ bitter resistance to those reforms.

But my main point in talking about writing is this: many people think
that standard Yiddish is an arbitrary creation that academics cooked up
to confuse the public. That just isn't true. The standard is just an
attempt to codify the commonly accepted practice of the _written_
language. Sure, there are areas of disagreement, but in broad outline,
and in particular with respect to the compromises between dialects, the
standard does that pretty well.

So what we have is, in this respect, like English: dialects differ a
great deal in pronunciation, much less so in writing. The standard is a
standard for writing; it's not an attempt to get people to change the way
they speak.

And the pronunciation that upsets Eliyahu Yuni (and others) so much is
just what results when people speak Yiddish the way it's written. Even
the way dialect speakers (usually) write it.

The tendency for people to try to pronounce things the way they see them
written is inevitable. (Why do you think so many people say "oyf"?) And
for people learning the language, this tendency is even stronger. (My
students are always asking me why I say "of" and not "oyf".)

I don't think this in itself should be very upsetting. On the other hand,
when some one claims that that's the _only_ way to speak, that is worth
getting upset about. I agree completely, and if I'm in any way
responsible for these people's behavior, I apologize. It shows a
deplorable lack of linguistic sophistication (not to mention manners).
Maybe if we really did have an elite cadre of well-trained yiddishists we
could eliminate this kind of thing. But we don't, and, human nature being
what it is, I'm afraid the problem is going to continue.

But let me turn now to the question: who needs a standard anyway? Let me
try to explain why this discussion gets me upset enough to waste time
writing long harrangues.

Writing a dictionary inevitably involves making choices. You can't
include every form from every dialect, if only because no one knows every
last variation. The same thing goes for textbooks. And when you make
choices, you always end up offending someone. It can't be helped.

So when you say there shouldn't be a standard, you're saying that there
shouldn't be any dictionaries or textbooks. And that means you're saying
no one should be able to learn Yiddish without living in a Yiddish-
speaking community. In effect, you're saying that Yiddish is your own
private club; non-members aren't welcome.

That's the point of the little personal story I began with: I grew up
surrounded by this attitude, to the extent that it didn't occur to me
that someone might have taken the great egalitarian step of writing a
textbook, so that I could study Yiddish, the way I could study any other
language.

Only as an adult did I learn that Yiddish is a language like any other
language, not a private plaything that I was permanently excluded from.
And thanks to textbooks, and dictionaries, _and_ the standards that make
those possible, I've learned to talk to my parents in their own language.
I don't talk exactly the way they do, and they tease me about it, but
they seem to think it's better than nothing. I certainly do.

So, those of you who speak some real dialect fluently: I envy the
opportunity that I was deprived of. And I sympathise with your
frustration with people who think that the only way to speak is "mit
gedrukte oysyes". But I'm sick and tired of the implication that people
like me should be deprived of the opportunity to learn the language. It's
not your private plaything; it belongs to the rest of us too.

Khayem Bochner

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 5.160

