
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 5.281
March 13, 1996

1) Sholem-Aleykhem's _Kenig Pik_ (Endnotes II) (Leonard Prager)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 13 Feb 96 21:42:39 IST
From: rhle302@uvm.haifa.ac.il
Subject: Sholem-Aleykhem's _Kenig Pik_

                              Endnotes

16. "Tsu der tsvetyer oyflage," vol. 4, Folksfond Edition, p. 43.
Sholem-Aleykhem here alludes to the successful Polish-language
production of _Tsezeyt un tseshpreyt_.

17. _Sholem-Aleykhem bukh_, p. 321.

18. Quoted from the Goodblatt manuscript of _Kenig Pik_, pp. 5-6.

19.  Conceivably, this is the first citation for _mahine_.  The single
reference to the word I have found is in Yankev Apteyker, "Nokh verter
fun smile un gegnt," _Yidishe shprakh_ 22:3 (December 1962), 87.
Apteyker defines the word:  "a gebeks, ongefilt mit vaynshl oder andere
peyres tsi yagdes, enlekh tsum _pie_."  He gives neither the word's
origin nor its stress.

20. Nokhen Oyslender saw the beginnings of Sholem-Aleykhem's lifelong
preoccupation with the urban nouveau riche in the first version of _Der
dokter_ ('The Doctor') [1887; revised 1907].  See
-Sholem-Aleykhem-oysgabe_, Kharkov, 1932, vol. 19, p. 229 (cited by
Nakhmen Mayzl, _Undzer Sholem-Aleykhem_, Warsaw:  Yidish Bukh, 1959, p.
1959.

21. _Yaknehoyz_, vol. 4, Folksfond Edition, p. 113.

22. Cardplaying in plot, theme, and setting functions is found
throughout Sholem-Aleykhem's works.  A number of shorter works, such as
_Kenig Pik_ and _Shrage_ take their titles from names or elements of
cardgames.  The name _Shrage_ is said to be an acronym for _sherl_
'diamonds', _royts_ 'hearts', _grin_ 'spades', _aykhl_ 'clubs'; it
refers to a worthless hand of four different suits.  _Sheraga_ is
Aramaic for 'light' <the Greek god of light, Phoebus (cf. the common
Yiddish male given name _Shrage-Fayvish_).  The acronym is very likely a
folk etymology.  The story _Knortn_ plays on the generic term 'cards'
for its title.  Note, too, _In tsveyen a zeks-un-zekhtsik_.  Cardplaying
scenes occur in _Vos iz khanike?_, _Goles-datshe_, _Maryenbad_, _Dos
groyse gevins_, _Yaknehoz_.  Allusions to and extended metaphors from
cardplaying are common (cf.  _Getsl_, _Ma-nishtane_, Di velt
geyttsurik_).

23. The Hebraist movement had been growing slowly for several decades
before _Kenig Pik_ was written.  In 1895 Yehuda Gur (Grazovski) had
published the first essay on the "natural method" of learning Hebrew
("Hashita hativit belimud sefateynu, o ivrit beivrit," _Hatsevi_, 1895)
and Yitschak Epshteyn 's _Ivrit beivrit_ was the first book based on
this method.  The young Hebrew teacher in _Shrage_ is presumably a
product of this movement.

24. Sholem-Aleykhem's Zionism began early.  In 1888 he joined the
Choveve Tsiyon ('Lovers of ZIon').  In 1890 he wrote the propagandistic
tale _Af yishev ertsisroel_ ('For the Settlement of the Land of Israel')
[later entitled _Zelik mekhanik-] (Kiev).  His most intensive Zionist
period was in the years 1898-1899, when he wrote _Af vos badarfn yidn a
land?_ ('Why Do the Jews Need a Country?')  (Warsaw, 1898) and the
unfinished ZIonist novel _Meshiekhs tsaytn_ ('The Messianic Era')
(Berditshev, 1898).  See Y. Kloyzner, "Sholem-Aleykhem der tsienist,"
-Di goldene keyt_ 34 (1959), 82-95.

25. Yankl Petakh in the Chanuka farce _In tsveyen a zeks-un-zekhtsik_
('A Two-Handed Game of Sixty-Six') says with self-conscious irony and
merriment:  "Lekovved khanike hot undz di toyre geheysn esn latkes, un
moyshe rabeyne hot tsulib dem heylikn yon-tef pozovolit shpiln in
kortn... makhn in tsveyen a zeks-un-zekhtsik, oder in dray hent a
finf-hundert-eyns..."  [vol. 3, _Komedyes_, Folksfond Edition, pp.
295-296] ('In honor of Chanuka the Torah has commanded us to eat
pancakes and for the sake of the holiday Moses permitted cardplaying...
a two-handed sixty-six and a three-handed five-hundred-and-one....')
Russification is an object of satire in this play.  The lawyer Glok
speaks "hekher halb rusish" ('more than half Russian').  As in _Kenig
pik_, russification of Jewish names in particular comes under attack
here.

26. _Sholem-Aleykhem bukh_, p. 150.

27. Chayim Nachman Bialik (1873-1934) is the greatest modern Hebrew
national poet and Shimen Frug (1860-1916) was a well-known Russian and
Yiddish poet.  Frug was the first Yiddish poet in Russia to write about
nature.  National Jewish themes are prominent in his work.

28. Sholem-Aleykhem is drawing attention here to the relationship
between Zionism and Jewish national values.

29. The "Sefardic" pronunciation is an occasion for comedy in several of
Sholem-Aleykhem's works.  See "Yidishistn un hebreistn" in _Kasrilevke
progres_ (section 12), written between 1914 and 1915.  Sholem-Aleykhem
was aware of the young Hebrew theater in Erets Yisrael which, of course,
would have performed his plays in the "Sefardic" pronunciation.  Ezra
Lahad reprinted a letter from Sholem-Aleykhem to the amateurs who staged
his _Tsezeyt un tseshpreyt_ in Jaffa in 1909 (see "Sholem-Aleykhem af
der hebreisher bine," _Kheyfe_ 4 [1967], 65).  Nachum Tsemach is said to
have staged Hebrew plays in Byalistok in 1910, using the "Sefardic"
pronunciation.  Max Weinreich and Haim Blanc argued that the so-called
"Sefardic" pronunciation of Modern Hebrew is now actually the Standard
Eastern Ashkenazic pronunciation with a few non-Ashkenazic features.

30. _Lehakonduktor_ ('to the conductor') is non-native today (Modern
Hebrew has _la_ for _leha_), but a century ago it was acceptable.
Sholem-Aleykhem emphasizes the Hebrew teacher's Central Yiddish
(different from his own Southeastern Yiddish) by orthographical means.
However, not all features of the teacher's speech are Central Yiddish.

31. Quoted from vol. 4, Folksfond Edition, p. 226. the correct form is
-kakoye blazhenstvo_ ('What pleasure!') rather than the guest's _kakaya
blazhenstva_.

32. There is a famous song, "Hashiveynu nazad" in Avrom Goldfadn's
operetta _Shtey uf mayn folk_.  The sense of returning to the past here
is positive.  This song was often parodied and there were many different
versions:  "Ershter hashiveynu" ('First "Take Us Back"').  London:  M.
Yozef, n.d., "2-ter {tsveyter} hashiveynu," "3-ter {driter} hashiveynu",
"A finfter hashiveynu nazad."  All these versions were apparently sung
to the tune of the original.  The "fifth" version is facetious.  There
must also have been a fourth version.  See Leonard Prager, _Yiddish
Culture in Britain_ (Frankfurt:  Lang, 1990), p. 307, 613 ff.; "Paul
Muni's Parents Sing at a London Jewish Music Hall," :HP1.Language and
Civilization; a Concerted Profusion of Essays and Studies in Honour of
Otto Hietsch:EHP1.. 2 vols.  Edited with the assistance of Teresa
Kirschner, Donald Gutch and Judith Gilbert by Claudia Blank.
Frankfurt/Bern/Paris/New York:  Peter Lang, 1992, vol. 1, pp. 428-471,
passim.

33. Sholem-Aleykhem makes it explicit in the text that the "Sefardic"
pronunciation is to be used:  "tsu berten af hebreish, mitn sfardishn
aktsent" ('to Berte in Hebrew, with the Sefardic accent').

34. Cf.  _Oylem-habe ('Eternal Life', a 1915 farce included in
_Komedyes_, pp. 267-280.

Leonard Prager

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 5.281

Mendele has 2 rules:

	1. Provide a meaningful Subject: line
	2. Sign your article (full name please)

Send articles to:
    mendele@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

Send change-of-status messages to:
    listserv@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

        a. For a temporary stop: set mendele nomail
        b. To resume delivery: set mendele mail
        c. To subscribe: sub mendele first_name last_name
        d. To unsubscribe kholile: unsub mendele

Other business:
    nmiller@mail.trincoll.edu

              ****Getting back issues****

1. Anonymous ftp archives are available.

ftp ftp.mendele.trincoll.edu
    in the directory pub/mendele/files

    A table of contents is also available, along with weekly updates.

2. Mendele archives can also be reached as follows:

via WWW:
    http://sunsite.unc.edu/yiddish/mewais.html

via gopher:
    gopher://sunsite.unc.edu/11/../.pub/academic/languages/yiddish/mendele

via ftp:
    ftp://sunsite.unc.edu/pub/academic/languages/yiddish/mendele



