
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 3.221
February 8, 1994

1) Origins of Eastern European Jewry (Jules F. Levin)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon Feb  7 21:06:00 1994
From: <JFLEVIN%UCRVMS.bitnet@YaleVM.YCC.Yale.Edu>
Subject: Origins of Eastern European Jewry

Several points:

        1.  The Huns DIDNT become the Hungarians.  The Huns left
Europe mid-fifth century after the death of Attila.  End of NINTH
century Europe was invaded by the Magyars, who grew up to become the
Hungarians, who speak a Finno-Ugaric, not a TURKic language.

        2.  In my current class "Intro to Slavic Langs", I was
surveying the ethnographic and national scene in 7th c. East-Central
Europe and after listing all the various groups I was asked by one
of my [gentile] students where or if the Jews were there...  Having
to answer extemporaneously, I pointed out that a) there were
certainly Jewish communities in the Greek cities around the Black
Sea, and b) the Khazars would not have converted to Judaism if there
had been no Jews around already.

        3.  There are the beginnings of scholarship on the early
presence of Jews in Russia.  Toporov, I believe, published something
on the pre-Slavic city of Kiev, which apparently was an outpost of
the Khazar empire.  There is a letter in Hebrew which describes the
city (a Jewish traveler), with a Jewish mercantile class and a
Turkic [Muslim?] military garrison.  There were Yeshivas!  All this
is pre-988--the conversion date of Rus'.  The famous (to all Slavic
grad students) Sermon of Ilarion on Christian love and Jewish law,
etc., sounds like a real polemic, not a mere hypothetical discursis.
And there are refs to Judaizing (zhidovstvujushchie) tendencies in
Kievan Rus'. So there were certainly Jews already in the East.

        4.  Koestler's theory is cockamamie; I believe he was trying
to reconcile his Jewish identity and his origin in Budapesht.  But
has anyone brought up Wechsler's theory of a West Slavic substratum
as the basis of Yiddish?  He also I believe argues for conversion,
but of Slavs, not Khazars! This is the theory that must be engaged,
not AK's!

        5.  Finally, the genetic angle.  The distinction someone was
reaching for is between genotype and phenotype.  I am skeptical
about someone's recollection that Jews have the same bloodtype
distributions as co-territorial Gentiles.  This runs counter to my
own memory of a college text that described the classic example of
geno- and pheno- difference--the Jews of Rome!  While
*phenotypically* identical to their Italian neighbors, they were
genotypically distinct in blood type distribution, despite over 2000
years of co-territoriality!  Now how could Italian Jews be
distinctive, while Jews in other European communities, with much
shorter durations of co-territoriality, be the same. Check your
reference again.

        Recently the local Jewish press ran a story about a Hispanic
person who is desperately searching for a bone-marrow donor.  After
failing to find a match in the Hispanic community, specialists are
advising him to extend his search to the Jewish community, since his
DNA profile most closely resembles those of Eastern European Jews!
They suspect Marrano ancestry.  Now this story, which I have no
reason to doubt, tend to support my view, that the key to all this
discussion is in genetic studies, not linguistics or whatever. But
we need to bring in a real geneticist.   I'm willing to bet 10 bucks
that it will turn out that E-E Jews are statistically, DNA-wise,
closer to Arabs than to co-territorial Slavs!  Like it or not,
folks, we are Semites.

        6.  Regarding all the raping and other forms of exogamous
activity referred to by fellow Mendeleans, my hunch is that much of
the resulting issue would move from the Jewish group to the
surrounding non-Jewish group. Of course halachically the offspring
of a Jewish woman is Jewish, which made it convenient in the case of
rape.  No doubt there was genetic inflow, but it was never enough to
overwhelm the basic Semitic gene-pool.  On the other hand, outflow
was probably greater, and I suspect that some areas of East Central
Europe have a substantial Jewish genetic substratum in the Gentile
population.  Of course, there are no genetically pure ethnic groups,
and the Jews of EE are certainly as Jewish as the Germans are German
(a substantial Slavic substratum there!), the Poles Polish, and
the Hungarians Hungarian.

Jules F. Levin

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 3.221

To subscribe, send SUB MENDELE FIRSTNAME LASTNAME to:

                   LISTSERV@YALEVM.YCC.YALE.EDU

Mendele has 2 rules:

	1. Provide a Subject: line.
	2. Sign your article.

Send submissions/responses to:
        mendele@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

Other business:
        nmiller@starbase.trincoll.edu

Anonymous ftp archives available on:
        ftp.mendele.trincoll.edu
        in the directory pub/mendele/files

