
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 5.317
May 10, 1996

1) Der alefbeys and its numerical values (Zellig Bach)
2) Goldbergs and mysteries of Shakespeare translations (Iosif Vaisman)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 9 May 1996 23:17:35 -0400
From: zellig@aol.com
Subject: Der alefbeys and its numerical values

This is a brief description how the _numerical_ values of the letters of the
alefbeys are used in Yiddish:

Table of the numerical values of the alefbeys:

      alef    1     lamed    30
      beys    2     mem      40
      giml    3     nun      50
      daled   4     samekh   60
      hey     5     ayen     70
      vov     6     pey      80
      zayen   7     tsadek   90
      khes    8     kuf     100
      tes     9     reysh   200
      yud    10     shin    300
      kof    20     tof     400

Note:  The sister-letters beys-veys, kof-khof, pey-fey, tof-sof have the same
numerical values;  similarly the final letters khof, mem, nun, fey, tsadek --
same values as the main letters.

The Yiddish word _khay_ (/khes/ and /yud/) means life, as in the popular,
joyous song "am yisroel khay" -- the people of Israel live.  It has, of
course, the same Hebrew root as the famous toast _lekhayim_  [to life], as
well as to the word "khayim" [life itself].

Some Jewish women, and not infrequently their gentile friends, wear a "khay"
pin, or pendant, since this word, and the joined design of the two letters
/khes/ and /yud/,  have taken on aspects of an amulet, an omen for good health
and good luck.

(In the B'nai B'rith International Monthly I saw recently an advertisement for
a _mezuze_. as a lapel pin.   According to the ad, it was designed and blessed
by rabbis for the wearers' "divine protection and guidance.")

On the occasions when a greater amount than the single value of a letter is
called for, the values of two letters -- or more-- are combined.  The
above-mentioned "khay" is a combination of the two letters /khes/ 8 plus
/yud/10, representing the number 18.

We find in Yiddish a number of numerical letter expressions: "Daled a'mes" a
frequently heard bitter lament about one's small, crowded living quarters:
"daled" referring to _four_, and "a'mes," a Hebrew word for the measure of a
very short length.

Congregants called up on Shabes to the reading of the toyre  frequently
announced their donations in numerical letters, such as "giml khay' (3 times
18), or "yud khay" (10 times 18) as part of their spoken Yiddish.

Examples of other letter value combinations in Yiddish:  A "kof-heyer" (20
plus 5);  "kuf kerblekh" (100 rubl):  /kuf/ plus /nun, pronounced "kan" --
150;  "kan terutsim" [150 excuses]; Sholem-Aleykhem:   "Kh'farmog shoyn haynt
hundert-fuftsik toyznt karbonim -- kan elef ru'k [I already have150 thousand
rubl kesef -- silver]  (_Khuliot_, Vol. 2, p. 97).

Several generations ago the letter cipher "taryag" was widely known in both
Yiddish and Hebrew., an acronym of the letters /tof/ + /reysh/ + /yud/ +
/giml/, the sum of which is 613, a shorthand reference  to the number of
religious _mitsves_.  As  many other numerical letter expressions, it could,
and was,  on occasion secularized and used as a _generic_ number.  At a
meeting of a secular organization, when a proposal for some action was
offered, the local "philosopher," a member of the board, buried it under a
barrage of questions.  To which another board member commented:  "Er vil
taryag bavorenishn"  [he wants (all) 613 precautions and safeguards].

Zellig Bach

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 10 May 1996 14:02:21 -0400 (EDT)
From: iiv@mmlds1.pha.unc.edu
Subject: Goldbergs and mysteries of Shakespeare translations

Giving references to the Yiddish translations of Hamlet (vol5.306) I simply
copied the names of translators from the bibliographic records. Leonard Prager
appropriately pointed out (vol5.308) that in case of Goldberg's translation
there are some unanswered questions. Indeed, his name is given as Itshe
Goldberg on five books (Yuli Tsezar, 1933; Hamlet, 1934; Otelo, 1935; Romeo un
Zhulyete, 1935; Der shturem, 1937) and as Y. Goldberg on Henry IV, 1936 (all
books were published in Minsk). Usually well-informed Library of Congress'
Name Authority File has only one entry for this name (that probably covers two
different Itshe Goldbergs) and does not give any dates. Goldberg is not
mentioned in both editions of Soviet Literary Encyclopaedia, nor in
Belorussian Encyclopaedia.

Surfing through the Yiddish books of that period we encounter another Goldberg
"the translator". His name is Lev, the Name Authority File knows that he lived
in 1892-1955, and he translated much more serious dramas: Stalin, Di yesoydes
fun Leninizm, 1924; Bukharin, Di internatsionale burzshuazye un Karl Kautski,
ir apostel, 1925; Stalin, Fragn fun Leninizm, 1936 (all published in Moscow).

It may look like a different profession, but surprisingly Lev Goldberg appears
again, this time in Varshe in 1914 with two translations: Minyaturn by Janusz
Korczak, and ... Yehudis, a tragedye in finf akten by Friedrich Hebbel. Now
the question of whether Itshe Goldberg and Lev Goldberg are one person becomes
quite legitimate (besides, Yitzhok-Leib is not that uncommon name). To add
another brick to this construction we find a Libe shpil, drame in dray aktn by
Arthur Schnitzler, translated by Y. Goldberg and published in Varshe in 1922.

Of course, the picture is not complete. This hypothesis, if correct, clarifies
the first name question, but we still know little about Goldberg(s)' life and
works and I agree with Leonard Prager that this is very unfortunate.

Disclaimer: Above speculations are based on bibliographic records only, I have
not seen any of the books in question.

Iosif Vaisman
Chapel Hill, NC

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 5.317

