
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 08.049
September 2, 1998

90 yorikn yoyvl fun der ershter yidisher shprakh-konferents in Tshernovits
                                Part III

1) Birnbaum's Opening Address At The Conference (Shikl Fishman)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 28 Aug 1998 09:48:09 -0700 (PDT)
From: Joshua Fishman <fishman@csli.Stanford.EDU>
Subject: Birnbaum's Opening Address At The Conference

Opening Address At The Conference for The Yiddish Language <*>

Honored Guests and Conference Participants:

The public enjoys mocking people who desire to venture on new paths, yet this
does not affect those hearty souls in the least. Nor does the derisive smile
undo them. They possess a unique power to slough off the mockers and stop the
jabbering mouths of fools and to shed light on benighted minds. They do not
tire in making known their thoughts and criticisms until all become convinced
and it becomes clear to the whole world that it is not they who are the fools
but rather their tireless scoffers. 

Think, for example, of the movement for the Yiddish language. It began
decades ago. At that time, there awoke the question in certain minds: why is
it that when other nations jumble several languages together and derive from
this melange a separate tongue with its unique soul, it is accorded the
legitimacy of a separate language and the due respect of nations? Why then
when Jews have done the same with the German, Hebrew and Slavic languages is
it disparaged as a jargon and sneered at? At that time, assimilation was
still powerful and the ethnonational movement had scarcely come into being.
There were probably few people who were informed with respect to the new
language question, and those that were, reacted to it with peals of
uproarious laughter. Nevertheless, the idea did not wither away, and one of
its first pioneers, if not the first, Aleksander Harkavi, lives till this
very day in New York and has joyously lived to see the realization of his
ideal. 

When Jewish intellectuals became ethnonationally conscious, it must be
admitted that they looked askance at the Yiddish language. They viewed it as
a nuisance which must be suffered patiently but which must not became the
object of dedication. It never dawned on them that the nationalist
intellectual must not only be bound closely by ties of the heart and will to
his people but must, first of all, live in their midst. He must breathe the
same cultural atmosphere, and his spiritual life must grow out of the
folk-soul. Furthermore, he must be able to infuse into it the simple and
unpretentious strength of the people. It never entered his mind that to speak
any language other than his very own - the language of his people, the
language of their innermost thoughts and feelings, of joys and sorrows, of
tears and of laughter - is tantamount to leaving his people and going off
into the desert-wilderness without friend or mentor, to follow the winding
road into a chaotic world, to turn oneself into a rambler, a lost wanderer,
torn from home and nationality. 

When the intellectuals were approached about this matter-when the attempt was
made to convince them of the legitimacy of Yiddish - they laughed and jeered.
"What, you want us, cultivated people, to stoop to the level of using your
jargon, your most ugly jargon? You can be certain that you will not have your
way with us. Better not make fools of yourselves." So they proclaimed
arrogantly and considered those who spoke to them of Yiddish to be crazy,
pure and simple. 

The Yiddish language took no notice of their laughing scorn and ugly
disparagement. With quiet but firm tread, it pursued the road which the new
age and the old nationality had diligently paved for it. The new age found
it, the language, necessary in order to open the eyes of the common people so
that they could at last see, voice their demands and carve a place for
themselves in a hostile world. The old nationality, wakening from an age -
old dream and as if longing for a major task, could not avoid the Yiddish
language. Slowly, there blossomed forth new intellectuals (even nationalist
intellectuals) who viewed Yiddish with a brighter and newer vision than their
predecessors. They were seized by the powerful feeling that this language is
the very soul of our people - its very heart, the very center of our life.
Why do we weep that we lack self-esteem? Where should we derive this strength
from, when we have spent our entire lives sunk in self-abasement? From which
source can we draw on, when we demonstrate greater fidelity to the Hottentots
than to ourselves, when we elevate the speech of others to the rank of
dignified languages and when we invidiously belittle our own as nothing more
than gibberish, as jargon; our language into which we have infused and
secreted hundreds of years of our spirit, our heart, our humor and our
deepest joys and sorrows? How can a nationality that suffers such supreme
denigration ever, of its own accord, recover a modicum of feeling of
self-respect and a sentiment for ethnonational sovereignty? Let us shed these
garments of shame in which our language is swaddled- with which our weak and
sickly _yidishkayt_ has permitted it to be clothed - and our people will once
more shine forth and bask in the warm glow of a long neglected self-respect. 

Why do we shed tears that we possess too dim an appreciation of beauty, or
that Yiddish life has banished beauty? Is beauty not that which we extract
from our minds and hearts and offer up to the world? Is beauty not the
reflection of our inner beauty, or our deeper harmony? Could we not have
already begun to perceive with true aesthetic sense, to see with eyes
sensitized to beauty, and realize that the paltry bit of German and Polish
speechifying has not elevated our inner beauty but only completely spoiled
that trifling sum found among us? Only then would we comprehend that any
unsightliness of Yiddish derives from our inner ugliness and discern what a
guarantee of luster and beauty a language can afford us, a language that is
held in high estimation and adorned by love. If we would understand, then let
us make the effort to do so! Let us remove the opprobrium from our language
and permit a new Jewish beauty to come forth from our midst and illuminate
our lives. 

Why do we cry that we do not possess sufficient strength in the world? Do we
endeavor to tap new wellsprings of strength and power? Have we not heard of
what a language can do for a people? That it shelters and screens its culture
and enables a people to unlock the door of ethnonational equality? Is this
not a large dose of strength and power, and is it not found very near us, in
our very mouths and on our own lips? We have only to reach out and grasp it
and make it our own. 

These and similar claims have been given greater voice ever so gradually.
Meanwhile, Yiddish literature has steadily developed. The first generation of
poets were followed closely by a second, then a third generation, and, bit by
bit, Yiddish was being widely used, entering into the general stream of life,
and people were increasingly becoming sensitive to the inescapable obligation
of helping it develop and prosper. This was efficaciously executed by the
establishment of rules and systems, codes of grammar and the regulation of
spelling. The call was burgeoning for the recognition of Yiddish as a
separate language. 

Today, Jews from different lands have come together to proudly reacquaint
themselves with our language and to discuss what can be done for our beloved
Yiddish. We have the good fortune to have with us those great writers who
evoke pride and command the deepest respect, even among the opponents and
deriders of our language. 

You see, my dear guests and members of the conference, that ridicule has not
foiled us; it has left us untouched and in the future it will not hurt us. As
long as our struggle was an individual one, there existed the faint
possibility that our strength would weaken and our spirit and patience
falter. Now that we are gathered in strength from all over the world, we have
nothing to fear. 

We are not spoiling for a fight with anyone. If fanatical adversaries will
waylay us, they will find us steady and imperturbable. They cannot harm us in
the least.  Honest opponents who demonstrate propriety in their dealings with
us will be answered with the utmost respect. The essence lies in work -
quiet, tireless and devoted work. 

The following five days can be the start of our endeavors, but we remain
cognizant that every beginning is connected with enormous responsibilities. 

I hereby declare to be opened the first Conference of the Yiddish language. 


<*> "Efenungs-rede af der konferents far der yidisher shprakh,"  D'r
birnboyms vokhnblat. 1908, no. 1, 8 Elul. Translated by Joshua Fishman.

The Russian-Jewish publication, Razsvet, in reporting N.Birnbaum's opening
remarks preceded them with the following introductory comment: "A quarter
past ten in the morning [Sunday, August 30, 1908] there walked onto the stage
Dr. N.  Birnbaum in the company of Y. L. Perets, S. Ash, Dr. Kh.  Zhitlovski
and other distinguished guests. Dr. N. Birnbaum opens the conference, reading
his first speech in Yiddish fluently from his notes. His expressions pure
Yiddish.  Recognizable on occasion are pedantries of speech and a polished
style. He reads his speech in the Galician dialect."

Reprinted from: Joshua A. Fishman, Ideology, society & language : the odyssey
of Nathan Birnbaum / Ann Arbor, Mich. : Karoma, 1987.
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 08.049

Address for the postings to Mendele: mendele@lists.yale.edu
Address for the list commands: listproc@lists.yale.edu

Mendele on the Web:

http://mendele.commons.yale.edu
http://sunsite.unc.edu/yiddish/mendele.html



