
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 5.101
September 4, 1995

1) More Jewish superstitions (Zellig Bach)
2) An-Ski's _Der Dibek_ (Zellig Bach)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 3 Sep 1995 16:20:47 -0400
From: zellig@aol.com
Subject: More Jewish superstitions

This a brief addendum to my recent post "Yiddish Superstitious
Expressions" (5.090), plus two general comments:

A.  "Baba Yaga":  The several posts describing the Russian superstition
of the evil house spirit with chicken legs further attest to the
universality of the nature of evil spirits.  Like all nit-gute or
nisht-gute, they are no respectors of geographical boundaries and invade
all cultures.

For some "unearthly" reasons the evil spirits seem totally unconcerned
with inclement weathers, and find residence all over the globe,
regardless of climates...

B.  "Maiteh" not a superstitious protective name:

In my paper referred to above (p. 4) I enumerated several superstitious
protective names.  I regret to say that the suggestion that the female
given name "Maiteh" or "Maitah" (5.097,1) falls in the same category is
incorrect.

The writer thinks that it is a superstitious protective name because the
meaning of "Maiteh" or Maitah" is one who is  already dead, so that the
Angel of Death would therefore overlook her altogether.  Is the name
Maiteh related to the modern Hebrew "meytah" (deceased)?  Highly
unlikely!

This suggestion is wrong on several grounds:

a) Psychologically:  It is unimaginable that parents would give a child a
name that is a constant reminder of death;  And the naming of a child is
first and foremost generally bound up with hope and an overwhelming wish
for success in all aspects of health and life.  Thus,  among girls' names
(for instance), are the four Hebrew-Yiddish biblical names Miriom, Rokhl,
Rivke, and Sore, and such Yiddish names as Blume (flower), Gute or Gite
(goodnes), Golde (of gold), Nekhe (after a male family member called
Noyekh), Shprintse (hope), Simke (after a male family member called
Simkhe, joy, festivity) -- all omens of life and a good future.

b) Etymologically:  In Yiddish the name is Matl, and its roots are the
German old variants Maedel or Maidel (A. Harkavy: _Yiddish-English-Hebrew
Dictionary, 1987 (p. 528).

The fact that Maiteh's mother changed her daughter's name to Musia is no
proof whatsoever that "Maiteh" meant, and was understood to mean,
"geshtorbn," passed away, as in modern Hebrew "meytah."  It rather
demonstrates an assimilationist trend.

Herewith two more Jewish superstitions:

C.  Gilgl:  The phrase "May he (or she) rest in peace (R.I.P.) is a
universally expressed, deeply felt human sentiment with regard to a
deceased. This is, of course, a reference to the _soul_ that departed the
body, believing, and hoping, that it coninues to live.

There is a widespread superstition that a sinful soul would find no rest
and, as a punishment, pass from one body into another body until it
atoned for its sins.  These souls could pass in any life form, such as a
bee, crow, dog, and so on.

The demotional character of this type of punishment is quite evident --
instead of living in a human body the soul in this restless stage is now
housed or, so to speak, embodied, in a lowly animal.

This belief is called in Yiddish _gilgl_ (from the Hebrew gilgUl),
meaning cycle, rotation, transformation.

D. Di'bek:  Another variant of the above superstition is the concept of
the di'bek.

The Yiddish word _di'bek_ derives from the Hebrew "dibUk" and means
adhesion, cleaving together, attachment.

According to khasidic literature, the soul of a deceitful, sinful person
becomes an evil spirit with the power of _transmigration _ into a living
body and, thereafter, refusing to leave until "driven out."

This belief in evil spirits and _migrant_ souls was very popular
throughout the world, and found expression in mystical literature,
folklore, and in secular writings echoing and mirroring for literary
effect the dark beliefs of the people.

Zellig Bach

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 3 Sep 1995 16:20:47 -0400
From: zellig@aol.com
Subject: An-Ski's _Der Dibek_

The folklorist and playwright Sh. An-Ski (pen name of Shleyme Zanvel
Rapoport (1863 - 1920) published in 1916 in Yiddish his play called _Der
Di'bek_.  It was produced to great acclaim all over the world, including
a movie version.

The well known choreographer Jerome Robins [I heard that he is a relative
of Sholem Aleykhem/Rabinovits/], who choreographed the famous dance of
the gang in _West Side Story_ and the equally famous "botle dance" in
_Fiddler on the Roof_, created several years ago a ballet on the theme of
the di'bek.

Herewith a brief synopsis of An-Ski's drama (to the best of my
recollection):

Two young yeshi've bokherim (yeshi've students), who studied the Talmud
together and became great pals, made a pact that they closed with a firm
handshake and the mention of God's name as witness.  This pact stipulated
that when they will get married, and the issue of one will be a girl and
the issue of the other a boy, the children will be married to each other.
And thus their bond of deep friendship prior to their marriages will
continue afterwards.

When they got married one was blessed with a baby girl, and the other
with a baby boy. The match therefore seemed fated and truly _bashert_
(predestined), according to their fathers' youthful agreement.

When the children reached their marriage age, however, the father of the
girl refused to live up to his "contractual" promise.  By then the young
woman and the young man were deeply in love with each other.

Pining for his destined beloved, the young man died with a broken heart,
and his soul cleaved unto her by entering her body, symbolizing not a
carnal union, but a spiritual union, that is a union of their souls.

There is a noteworthy diviation from the original belief:  the young
man's soul was not wicked unto itself, which would have been the cause
for its tansmigration.  The very fact that it chose on its own to attach
itself to her body and to possess it made it wicked, and called for the
dreaded ceremony of its expulsion.

It is further noteworthy that An-Ski introduced in this drama, based on
the di'bek legend, a modern romantic motif.

I saw the play when I was a youngster, and to this day, about sixty years
later, still remember the powerful effect of the adjuration scene.

Zellig Bach
Lakehurst, NJ

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 5.101

Mendele has 2 rules:

	1. Provide a meaningful Subject: line
	2. Sign your article (full name please)

Send articles to:
    mendele@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

Send change-of-status messages to:
    listserv@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

        a. For a temporary stop: set mendele nomail
        b. To resume delivery: set mendele mail
        c. To subscribe: sub mendele first_name last_name
        d. To unsubscribe kholile: unsub mendele

Other business:
    nmiller@mail.trincoll.edu

              ****Getting back issues****

1. Anonymous ftp archives are available.

ftp ftp.mendele.trincoll.edu
    in the directory pub/mendele/files

    A table of contents is also available, along with weekly updates.

2. Mendele archives can also be reached as follows:

via WWW:
    http://sunsite.unc.edu/yiddish/mewais.html

via gopher:
    gopher://sunsite.unc.edu/11/../.pub/academic/languages/yiddish/mendele

via ftp:
    ftp://sunsite.unc.edu/pub/academic/languages/yiddish/mendele



