Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 1 no.21
June 12, 1991
 
1) Introduction (William Adelman)
2) Dutsn and irtsn (Noyekh Miller)
1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: 11 Jun 91 03:22:42 EDT
From: William Adelman <72230.1066@CompuServe.COM>
Subject: Introduction

I'm William Adelman; I've never had the benefit of a
Yiddish diminutive.  I am senior majoring in English
Literature, with an emphasis in Creative Writing.  My
only exposure to the language at hand has been while in
Israel, and by picking up as much as has filtered into
English.  Once, in a fit, I decided to write the copy
for a picture book called The Joy of Yiddish Sign
Language, but my partner, the artist, dropped out, and
it never got to page one.        

I won't have much to contribute at first, but as I
learn the language(s), I hope to add something of
value.  Meanwhile, listening with open ears.
2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: 11 Jun 91
From: Noyekh Miller (nmiller@trincc.bitnet)
Subject: Dutsn and irtsn: a reply to Mikhl Herzog

Thanks, Mikhl, for the distinction between Canadian and
U.S. Yiddish in the matter of forms of address [Mendele
Vol 1.17].  A naive observer might have predicted the
exact opposite, Canada being supposed to be more formal
than its south-ern neighbor. So how come it's the other
way?  I have an idea, but first let me describe the
facts as I see them.

Like you, I'm a native Yiddish-speaker (indeed Yiddish
was first by about 5 years).  I learned to use the
intimate form when speaking to my parents and my
grandparents.  Period.  My parents, in speaking to any
adults other than their siblings, used 'ir' with their
close friends and the third person 'zey' for everyone
else.  Even more remote like when my grandmother took
me to our teler-lefel rov to pasken a shayle: 'vus zugt
der rov, s'iz kusher?'  And nothing strange about it:
Yiddish like other European languages follows the
rules.  And is at least as age- and rank-conscious as
the others.  Two examples: my mother spoke one way or
the other to her closest friend at least twice a day
for 45 years.  But it was Mrs. M. and Mrs. C. and 'ir'
till the end.  My grandparents and their oldest son
used 'du' with my father, but it was 'ir' the other
way.  I once asked my father (when he was about 65 give
or take) how come my uncle, his brother-in-law, got
such special treatment.  The answer: 'er iz elter'.  

Now I'll bet, Mikhl, that this situation obtained in
Toronto as well.  So how come we differ?  I offer
something along the lines of the Portuguese-Romanian
hypothesis.  (I forget the name it goes by among lin-
guists, and it's anyway been discredited I have no 
doubt, but being a kind soul I trust you to let me down
gently.) 

Canadian Jews were, for a whole variety of reasons
which I wish someone would explore, under less pressure
to assimilate, encouraged to develop their own educa-
tional institutions, etc.  As a result, Yiddish was far
more likely to be a) studied in schools (you yourself
went through the Yiddish school system) and b) perhaps
Canadianized by the Canadian-born generation who assim-
ilated the informal forms of English to Yiddish so that
'du' was used with comparative strangers as well.    

But Yiddish clearly had a different fate in the United
States.  The U.S. was more open, had more of an estab-
lished community of German Jews to set the tone and
veto anything that smacked of Jewish separatism of any
kind, etc.  Few of us went to Yiddish schools and those
who did seem to have learned as little as the rest of
us seem to have learned in heder.  Item: never in my
life have I _spoken_ Yiddish (other than words and
phrases) to any of my cousins or friends or contempo-
raries, many of whom speak Yiddish at least well as I
do.  Usual exceptions.  Essentially 50 years of silence
except for the Yiddish I speak with myself, but that's
maybe more interesting to alienists than to members of
this list.  At any rate, one result for me and for
others who left home as adolescents is a kind of froz-
en, fossilized Yiddish.

Assuming that my case is not atypical, I assume that
this has something to do with the fixed belief on the
part of many American Yiddish-speakers that the lan-
guage has no rules; and more serious, the virtual
disappearance of the idioms that make Yiddish such a
colorful and witty language because such expressions
(in an age-ranked culture) were off-limits to the
young.  The same rule applied I think to anything that
in the young would have been seen as affected: many
Hebrew expressions (e.g. al akhes kamo v'kamo) or
flowery constructions (e.g. s'iz shoyn a zeyger akht)
or ironic comments (afn boydem iz a yarid).  Chilren in
all cultures (see Miller's Fourth Law) are forbidden to
touch irony, and a good thing too. 

The untershte shura would seem to be that the language
spoken by one's cohort is ultimately more important
than that of parents in determining the extent to which
a language will be spoken at an adult and fully-devel-
oped level.  

The foregoing is as you can see not the result of
scholarship but of untrained speculation.  Not being a
linguist, the only remark that might hurt my feelings
would be that it's a boring topic.  Otherwise, fire
away.  I hope that others will want to join the dis-
cussion.  

[A note on the European character of Yiddish.  I wonder
to what extent the Hebrew spoken and written in eastern
Europe was influenced by Yiddish at least with respect
to address.  During the hakofes at simkhas toyra,  for
instance, it's customary for bystanders to say 'Ir zolt
derleybn biz iber a yor un nokh a mol..' To which the
proper response is 'gam atem'.  I think I remember a
letter to the Besht from his brother-in-law Reb Avrom
Gershon Kitever with the same 'atem'.  I don't know how
widespread this and similar usages was, and I hope that
someone on this list does know.  Was the Hebrew of the
early maskilim, for instance, free of European con-
structions?]
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol 1.21

