
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 5.136
October 11, 1995

1) Dialects and standards (Khayem Bochner)
2) Dialects and standards (Allen Edel)
3) Dialects and standards (Khayem Bochner)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sun, 08 Oct 95 23:34:51 -0400
From: bochner@das.harvard.edu
Subject: standards (again, alas)

Arre Komar (5.130) and Miriam Isaacs (5.134) have addressed related, but I
think different, issues about standards. I'll address myself here to the
former.

Khaver Komar asks about cases of conflict between the Yiddish of khsidim
and the Yiddish of academics. What sorts of conflict does he have in
mind? S'kumt den bald tsu petsh? Seriously, has anyone heard of concern
being expressed in the Hassidic community about the kind of Yiddish
that's taught in universities? Or of an academic trying to tell khsidim
to change their Yiddish because it isn't pure enough? I haven't.

Perhaps Khaver Komar is suggesting that college courses should teach
students the Yiddish of khsidim. An interesting idea. Care to suggest a
textbook? And, much more importantly, what would you mean by _the_
Yiddish of khsidim? They don't all speak the same dialect, you know. The
older generation represents a variety of dialects, and in the younger
generation that's compounded by differing outside influences (usually
English or Hebrew). (This is something Miriam Isaacs has studied, if I'm
not mistaken, and something that would be interesting to hear about.)
Perhaps the khsidim would prefer that the existing artificial standard be
taught, if the alternative would be to favor the dialect of one rebe over
the dialect of another? Or perhaps not; that's for them to say.

Khaver Komar says further that "I get the impression that no one in our
khevre either knows or cares how the living language is being employed in
the real world."

Well, when I visit friends who speak Yiddish to their young children (I
have no children of my own), am I entering the twilight zone? I may be an
apikoyres, but as far as I know that doesn't disqualify me as a resident
of the real world. And a language that is spoken by children is a living
language.

Ah, but secular (or even non-ultra-orthodox) yiddishists are few in
number in comparison with the ultra-orthodox (of various kinds) Yiddish
speakers? So? If numbers were our primary concern, we would drop Yiddish
in favor of English, and then have to drop English in favor of Chinese.

Does this mean I'm not interested in learning about the varieties of
Yiddish that are spoken in communities other than my own? On the
contrary, I'd love to learn more about it. I suspect the reason that
Khaver Komar's questions have not gotten much response is that most of us
on Mendele have little contact with the Hassidic community. But if there
is anyone among us who can fill us in, please, I'm sure there's lots to
tell.

So much for "conflict" (at least as far as I'm concerned ;-). Perhaps
tomorrow I'll return to the issue of "dialect".

Khayem Bochner

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 10 Oct 95 17:49 PDT
From: allen_edel@macnexus.org
Subject: Af vs. oyf and related questions

YIVO or University Yiddish represents a lowest common denominator that
any Yiddish speaker will not find jarring. It is a combination of accents
that no European native speaker uses. It tends more towards a Litvakish
dialect, without the Litvak grammatical elisions. Just as, in America,
many Southerners (wrongly) believe their accents connote ignorance, many
Yiddish speakers fancy that a Litvak accent is more "proper" because of
their intellectual reputation.

Just as, in English, we do not write the same way we talk (I would have
said "don't" rather than "do not" in that phrase), there is a formal
Yiddish, and a colloquial yiddish. My mother, too, is always telling me
"Yes, that is the proper way, but nobody says it like that."

YIVO has attempted to codify a received standard Yiddish that no one
naturally speaks. It's good to have the dictionary and grammar books for
reference. If there were enough of us, those reference books would be
updated periodically as speakers bring in new words and change the
language, just as the OED is updated.

I am, frankly, only interested in using the dialect of my parents
(Litvak) since that is my personal heritage.I have many friends who are
Lubavitcher chassidim, and they all speak Litvak. My cousin, a Belzer
chosid, who lives in Israel, speaks with a Galitzianer accent.

Allan Edel

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 09 Oct 95 21:56:42 -0400
From: bochner@das.harvard.edu
Subject: Dialects and standards

Miriam Isaacs writes [5.134]: "I would recommend reconsideration of
attitudes towards dialects. The time for purism - is past. I find that
there are many who know Yiddish and who might speak it, but do not
because of fear of making mistakes."  "It is appropriate to ask whether
standard Yiddish reflects a historical need more than a present one. The
small but dedicated cadre of Yiddishists certainly adhere to the standard
with vigor."

These remarks seem to reflect a sense that there's an invisible elite
Yiddish dialect police, striking fear into the hearts of dialect-speakers
everywhere. One mis-spoken word, and you'll be subject to punishment, or
at least ridicule. Yiddish-land as a police state, a scary thought
indeed.

I truly don't understand where this feeling comes from; it certainly
doesn't match up with my experience of yiddishists. Yiddishists who speak
standard yiddish usually do so because they learned it out of a book;
usually they're the ones getting a little embarassed as they fumble for
words trying to keep up with the conversation. (I put myself in this
category, by the way. Most of the time, at least :-() Most of the truly
fluent yiddishists I know speak their diverse home dialects except when
special circumstances, such as being in front of a classroom, call for
standardized speech. Not all, but most.

It certainly is true that there's a lot of dialect ridicule out there.
And my experience is that Polish Yiddish (Miriam's home dialect and mine
(except that I don't speak it very well)) gets more than its fair share
of the ridicule. I resent that, as Miriam does.

But in my experience this ridicule doesn't come from an elite cadre of
yiddishists, vigorously enforcing standard Yiddish. On the contrary, my
experience is that it mostly comes from dialect speakers indulging in the
old-fashioned vice of regional rivalry. In fact, it often comes from
people who don't speak much Yiddish themselves, but who nevertheless are
convinced that their parents spoke the one true Yiddish, unlike all those
other "corrupted" varieties.

Does "standard Yiddish reflect a historical need more than a present
one"? Well, if people want to learn Yiddish, you have to teach them
something. I've heard of a teacher who deals with the difficult issue of
case/gender endings on adjectives by telling students to mumble: "That
way no one will know if you got it right." Is that a way to teach respect
for the language, and for the people who speak it?

"Yidish iz nisht hefker", to quote Zellig Bach. It's hard for people to
understand that the variation between the dialects doesn't mean that
anything goes. I don't care what dialect you speak, as long as it's a
real dialect. "Ikh tu nisht shprekhndik a zeyer guter yidish" is fine for
a beginning student's early attempts at conversation, but it isn't good
Yiddish, no matter what your home dialect may be. I think that if we want
students to do better than that, we have to have some standard to serve
as a model.  Maybe someday a new standard will arise from the Hassidic
community; but until it does, we're stuck with the standard we've got.

genug shoyn!

Khayem Bochner

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 5.136

Mendele has 2 rules:

	1. Provide a meaningful Subject: line
	2. Sign your article (full name please)

Send articles to:
    mendele@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

Send change-of-status messages to:
    listserv@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

        a. For a temporary stop: set mendele nomail
        b. To resume delivery: set mendele mail
        c. To subscribe: sub mendele first_name last_name
        d. To unsubscribe kholile: unsub mendele

Other business:
    nmiller@mail.trincoll.edu

              ****Getting back issues****

1. Anonymous ftp archives are available.

ftp ftp.mendele.trincoll.edu
    in the directory pub/mendele/files

    A table of contents is also available, along with weekly updates.

2. Mendele archives can also be reached as follows:

via WWW:
    http://sunsite.unc.edu/yiddish/mewais.html

via gopher:
    gopher://sunsite.unc.edu/11/../.pub/academic/languages/yiddish/mendele

via ftp:
    ftp://sunsite.unc.edu/pub/academic/languages/yiddish/mendele



