Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 1 no. 46
July 20, 1991
 
1) Response (Ellen Prince)
2) Skotsl kumt (Mikhl Herzog and Noyekh Miller)
3) Various (Mikhl Herzog)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 19 Jul 91 12:31:59 -0400
From: Ellen Prince <ellen@central.cis.upenn.edu>
Subject: RE: Vol 1 .44 query

i'm sure other readers will have answers, some no doubt
more authoritative, but here's my two cents:

david hendler writes:

>1.  Is _yenta_ truly from Latin _gentilis_?  If so,
>how did it become feminine, why does it mean what it
>does (rather than 'Gentile woman'), and how come
>people don't use it instead of _shiksa_, which I
>consider offensive?

following max weinreich, among others, yente is from
judeo-french (which is from latin), where it was a
woman's name, spelled in modern french 'gentille',
meaning 'nice, gentle, kind'. it was and i would say
still is typical to give females non-biblical--even
non-jewish--names, at least much more so than to give
males such names. it did not mean 'gentile'. 'gentile',
by the way, originally meant simply 'of the people',
whence it came to be 'of the OTHER people', whence it
came to mean 'non-jewish'. mormons use the term to
denote non-mormon. (ultimately, the word for
'gentille/gentle/yente/...' and the word for 'gentile'
came from the same latin word, gens, gentis, 'people',
i  think. but this was way back, before judeo-french.)

>2.  Is there an equivalent word for men?  _Yentl_ is
>different, surely, but why?

since males typically (necessarily?) get jewish names,
and since yente was judeo-french, with no jewish sig-
nificance, there would not have been a cognate name for
males.

yentl is simply yente + -l, -l being a diminutive
suffix. 

>3.  Are there other words for matchmakers in Yiddish,
>of the informal or formal kind?
my understanding of your original comment is that
you've never heard shadkhn used for the informal kind.
certainly, it was used this way where i grew up (brook-
lyn). yente, in my native yinglish, meant
'busybody/gossip', not 'matchmaker'. i never heard any
yiddish/yinglish word other than shadkhn(te) for some-
one who matches people up, whether for a fee or for
fun. in fact, if memory serves me, in yinglish, female
matchmakers were usually called by the yiddish mascu-
line form, shadkhn (as opposed to shadkhnte, as in
yiddish). but i wouldn't swear to this.

re shikse, i've heard that it's considered pejorative,
but this was not my experience. certainly, one of the
most puzzling social situations of my early childhood
was when people called me a 'sheyne shikse', meaning i
had light hair and skin and a straight nose. (my puz-
zlement was knowing whether i should say 'thank you',
since it was clearly intended as a compliment. somehow,
the sickness of it all was clear to me at a tender
age.) in any event, it was certainly not pejorative. 

whether or not one finds shikse pejorative, i would
definitely NOT suggest using 'yente' as a non-pejora-
tive substitute! 

if i may add a free association, i suspect what is
pejorative about shikse is the contexts in which you've
heard it used, i.e. you heard it used when people had a
low opinion of the person in question. the first time i
went to france (1962), i was told by a french protes-
tant that i shouldn't say i was 'juive' but
'israelite'--'juive', she said, was pejorative. later,
i met french jews and learned that they certainly
called themselves 'juifs'--it was only non-jews who
found it pejorative, from having heard it so often in
anti-semitic epithets like 'sale juif' ('dirty jew').
of course, the analog ends there--we can't exactly poll
yiddish-speaking shikses to ask what THEY prefer to be 
called! oh well.

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: July 11, 1991
Subject: 'Skotsl komt' and other expressions

(Note: this continues an exchange begun in Vol 1.42)

MH: I've heard of only one sex determined expression in
Yiddish In much of the West (Switzerland, Alsace), only
the women say "gotlkum/kotlkum", the western equivalent
of "skotsl kumt" or one of its variants. Do you know
the expression? How do you say it? When? What does it
mean? After you answer, I'll tell you what the men in
the West say, instead.
 
You're right on target with "gevo(y)r(e)/gevu(e)r/
gevoyer vern"; interesting that you should have chosen
the example that you did: "g.v. vegn emitsns gezunt".
It bridges the two regional meanings; 1. 'to find out'
anything, tsi er iz gezunt, tsi es regnt in droysn, tsi
di bobe kumt haynt, etc. 2. In the Northeast, it means
only 'to visit the sick', mevaker-khoyle zayn. "men
geyt IM/IR/DEM TATN gevor vern".
 

NM: Skotsl kumt.  I never heard it but I _have_ read it
2 or 3 times, I don't know where.  I understood it from
the context to be a somewhat disrespectful welcome,
like the one we _did_ use: 'aha! geyovet!'. But why it
should only be used to a woman (Harkavy bears you out)
is a mystery.  Please explain.  By the way, Stutchkoff
doesn't list it under greetings, or did I miss it? 
Does the term maybe refer to the European association
of cats with (generally female) witches?


MH: Skotsl kumt/kimt has nothing to do with cats or
witches. Of course, "kats" in Podolia-Bessarabia would
be pronounced "kots" but, even so, the diminutive would
be "ketsl"; so, we have to look elsewhere. Frankly, I
didn't know that Harkavy listed it. (I don't havbe
Stutshkoff with me.) As you say, Harkavy glosses it
"welcome ! (to a woman)"; "borekhAbe" (about which,
more below). I'm surprised. The only constraint I know
of is in Western Yiddish, (Switzerland, Alsace) where
the local version "gotl/kotlkum" is SAID only by women;
the men say "sholem-aleykhem". Why? I've never heard an
explanation for this.  

In the East, the variants are legion because its origin
is so opaque. In fact, I've never heard anyone say that
it means "welcome" although they can tell you when they
use it; generally "az siz gekumen a zeltener gast". To
wit: "O, zey nor skotsl kimt" (presumably "dos kotsl"
is coming) or "skocl kint (sic!) iz gekimen" (as if it
concerned some kind of child). Would you believe
"shkotsl" (from "shkotsim") or "gots tsel (God's shad-
ow)"?
 
Whence all of this? Zalmen Reyzen, in an article in
Yidishe Filologye, I (1924) offers a medieval German
greeting as the source: "bis gote (unde mir)
willkommen". There's apparently another possibility,
but I don't have access to my notes here. As I recall,
Herb Paper, Iranist, Judeo-Persian specialist,
Yiddishist (formerly at Ann Arbor, now at HUC,
Cincinnatti) found a possible alternative source (in
Northern German, I think). I will try to reach him when
he returns from Israel in the Fall, perhaps to draw him
into the network. His repertoire of Yiddish jokes and
Yeshivah humor is quite extensive.
 
As for "borekhAbe". A major dictionary of cognates in a
number of European languages lists this as the etymolo-
gy of a word we know well in English. Three brownie
points if you can name the English word.
 
NM: Shkotsl did cross my mind, but gots tsel didn't. 
And of course the medieval German one avade didn't
occur to me.  Wonderful.

The same holds for the English derivative of borekhAbe. 
I've tried a lot and believe me I'll try some more, but
so far I've broken my head in vain.  

Readers: What's the answer to Mikhl's retenish?

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Sat, 20 Jul 91  14:53 EDT
From: ZOGUR@CUVMB.BITNET
Subject: From Mikhl Herzog to various

To: melekh (viswanat@draco.rutgers.edu)
 
Truthfully, I guessed much later than I should have
that your native language was Tamil. Your name should
have been a giveaway but the implication simply eluded
me. What year were you in the Columbia-YIVO summer
program? Why did I miss you there? I realize, now that
we were at KlezKamp together in  December 1989, and
that I saw you often during a class I took with my
favorite folk-dance teacher. Won't you give her my
regards?  
I hope someone is taking careful notes on the features
of Tamil-Yiddish bilingualism.
 
Concerning your observations in Amsterdam. I think
you're quite right but, by chance, you picked one of
the two anomalous forms in Yiddish to illustrate the
systematic use of [ay] where Standard Yiddish would
have [ey]. Normally, it's Central (more or less "Pol-
ish") Yiddish [ay] as against Standard Yiddish (and
Easternmost Yiddish; i.e. "Litvish" and "Ukrainian)
[ey]. The negative word "keyn" is exceptional: "Polish"
AND "Litvish" both say "kayn"; only the Southeast
actually says "keyn": Standard Yiddish recommends
"keyn" but the confusion is such that Weinreich's
dictionary has an entry "kayn" with a cross-reference
to "keyn". Interestingly, "keynmol" follows the expect-
ed variation. The suffixes "-heyt/-hayt" and "-keyt/-
kayt" are similarly anomalous.
 
I'm interested in your observations about the reluc-
tance of the khasidim to speak to you in Yiddish. I've
had a considerable number of graduate students who
didn't "look" like Yiddish speakers and who encountered
the same problem. At first,  they were often taken for
Israelis. Do you find that the khasidim overcome their
reluctance? From my observations at a Lubavitsher
"farbrengen", they've learned to accept many people who
don't "look the part". Or is it different there than in
Williamsburg?  
To: Joseph Galron <jgalron@magnus.acs.ohio-state.edu>
Is your bibliography of the writings of Prof. Dov Sadan
easily available? Who is publishing the supplement? To: 

To: dave@lsuc.on.CA
(Subject forwarded from Usenet)
 
1.yente 'vulgar/sentimental woman', 'busybody'; not a
matchmaker although, as a busybody, she may "mix in",
etc.
 
2. yente is derived from (is a "back-formation" from)
yentl, and not the other way round. I don't have the
sources at hand, but think that our first record is of
the variant "gentl" (perhaps "gentil"); the spelling
with "y" appears in the Memorbuch of 1096 (= yizker-
bukh) of the community of Nurenburg; The g/y variation
is common; see, e.g., Standard Yiddish "dayges" as
against the Western Yiddish variant "dayes"; the Berlin
German dialect has "yants yut" for Standard German
"ganz gut", etc. So... Yent(i)l/Gent(i)l from "gentile"
["hard g" as in "get", and pronounce the final "e"].
The vocalic ending may account for its incorporation as
a feminine name.
 
There is no record of a masculine equivalent. Why?
That's never an easy question to answer satisfactorily
but, contributing factors may be i) the vocalic ending
(although that didn't stop us from taking Simkhe (or
Yona) as a masculine name--Yiddish feminine equivalent
Sime (none for Yona); ii) most Yiddish masculine names
are of Hebrew and Aramaic derivation; Latin & Greek
contribute a few. Many more feminine names are derived
from other sources.
 
3. There is no other word for "shadkhn" in Yiddish but,
I swear that I've seen, with my own eyes, a native
Hebrew speaker's translation of Yiddish "shadkn" into
Ivrit as "ose gafrurim". How's your Hebrew? Do you
follow the route the translator took? 

To: A.MM@AppleLink.Apple.COM
Unless it's the same one you know, there is a second
(non-orthodox) native Yiddish speaker in Vienna. Check
the office of the Helsinki Watch Committee.
 
Are you referring to Harkavy's 1898 dictionary?
$100???? Don't buy it!!!

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol 1.046