
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 2 no. 89
November 5, 1992
 
1) Hersh Raseyner (Zachary Baker)
2) Bloyz (Ellen Prince)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date:  Tuesday, November 3, 1992
From:  Zachary Baker (bm.yib@rlg.bitnet)
Subject:  Story:  "Mayn krig mit Hersh Raseyner"

In MENDELE vol. 2 no. 86 Leonard Prager requests the source
for the original Yiddish version of Chaim Grade's story
"Mayn krig mit Hersh Raseyner."  The answer is that it
first appeared in the journal [Y]IDISHER KEMFER, vol. 32,
no. 923 (Rosh Hashanah issue, Sept. 28, 1951), pp. 33-44.
It was reprinted in 1969, in a thin volume containing
Grade's classic poem "Musernikes" and the story "Mayn krig
[etc.]" (Jerusalem:  The Hebrew University of Jerusalem,
Department of Yiddish Language and Literature). An English
translation of the story was published in Irving Howe and
Eliezer Greenberg's anthology A TREASURY OF YIDDISH STORIES
(New York:  The Viking Press, 1954), pp. 579-606.  The
story was made into the film "The Quarrel," which is
currently showing, for a two-week run (this week and next)
at New York's Film Forum, on Houston Street.  The film,
which is set in Montreal (the story was set in Paris), is a
Canadian production and it may be shown on U.S. public
television.  Reports are that it is a kind of Jewish "My
Dinner With Andre'."  (I intend to see it later this week.)

Secondly, I must correct an erroneous impression conveyed
by Ellen Prince, regarding the purported interpolation of
Max Weinreich's reflections on the impact of the
"Hitler-khurbm" on Yiddish (she writes:  "That's
remarkable... SO remarkable in fact that I'd wonder if it
wasn't added later").  The issue of YIVO- BLETER in which
Weinreich's remarks appeared was the January- February 1941
issue; in those days, the journal was published promptly on
a bimonthly basis (let's leave aside Prof. Prince's
dismissive comment, "It's not that unusual for YIVO to be a
few years behind in publication, even in peacetime!").  If
Weinreich interpolated that observation at a later date
(which I seriously doubt), it could have come no later than
late February or early March of 1941.

Incidentally, I have in my files (not handy, but
retrievable) a photocopy of an undated interview with the
historian Simon Dubnow, which must have been conducted in
1940.  (The interview was with a visiting Yiddish
journalist, A. M. Kayzer, and it appeared in a Lithuanian
or Latvian Yiddish newspaper. The original clipping was
found in the Elias Tcherikower archives at YIVO.)  To the
best of my recollection, Dubnow also used the word "khurbm"
to characterize what was occurring in Poland under the Nazi
occupation.  (Remember:  He was living in Riga, which was
still nominally independent, although it would be annexed
to the Soviet Union in the summer of 1940, and become the
capital of the Latvian S.S.R.)  But he continued, along
these lines: There will still be a "Jewish problem" in
Eastern Europe after this is all over.  There will still be
two million Jews in Poland. (He presumably had in mind the
Generalgouvernement and western territories annexed by
Germany.)  They will be reduced to abject poverty by the
war; what will come afterwards?

To return to Weinreich:  practically in the same breath
that he referred to the "Hitler-khurbm" he spoke of his
hopes for the postwar years:  "...we are obligated to
preserve the property which we possess [i.e., Yiddish] for
the Europe of tomorrow, when the ghetto walls will collapse
and bury underneath them those who erected them" ("Di
yidishe visnshaft in der hayntiker tsayt," fun M. Vaynraykh
[Weinreich], in YIVO-BLETER, vol. 17, no. 1 (Jan.- Feb.
1941), p. 7.)

"Khurbm," in Dubnow's mind as of 1940, and -- I posit -- in
Weinreich's mind at the beginning of 1941, probably meant
the ghettoization, hunger, impoverishment, and
terrorization (with sporadic mass murders) of Eastern
European Jewry.  The term naturally became understood to
encompass much more, as events unfolded.

Zachary Baker

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 03 Nov 92 14:16:20 EST
From: "Ellen F. Prince" <ellen@central.cis.upenn.edu>
Subject: RE: bloyz

(Joe Frisch writes:)

>The example that was given: bloyz ikh bin foyl
>ouftsushteyn in german would be: Ich bin bloss zu faul um
>aufzustehen or in English it follows: I am just too lazy
>to get up.

joe, i meant to mark this sentence with a _*_, meaning
'impossible', in contrast to the same sentence with _nor_,
which is not only possible but in fact occurred. sorry if i
omitted the asterisk or didn't make clear what it meant.

ellen prince

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol 2.89

If your message is intended for MENDELE, please write to:

                 mendele@vax1.trincoll.edu
                          or
                 mendele@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

If your node is Bitnet-only and is not connected to the Internet,
please send your message to:

                 mendele@trincc
                          or
                 mendele@yalevm

If you want to discuss personal business or have a shmues with
the shames, please write to:

                 nmiller@vax1.trincoll.edu
                          or
                 nmiller@trincc

Please sign your articles.

