Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 1 no. 182
February 21, 1992
 
1) Various (Yude-Leyb Proger)
2) Yiddish and Yiddiskayt (Ruvn-Mendl Turkel)
3) Yiddish and Yiddiskayt (Moishe-Nussen Eytan)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 21 Feb 92 10:15:48 IST
From: YUDE-LEYB <RHLE302@HAIFAUVM.BITNET>
Subject: MISC.

Mikhl:  I am afraid you missed the point about _zhargon_ .
It is well known that it was once a legitimate name for
Yiddish and used by many Yiddish writers -- but that was
over half a century ago.  You don't refer to a black today
as a _Negro_.  A word's meaning has a time context.
 
Mikhl, Moyshe-Nosn, Bob:

The _klafte_ explanation was too simple.  The plural of Y.
_kelev_ is _klovim_.  Bob Werman assures me that _klafte_
is from Aramaic, which solves the problem of why it has
that form in WY, EY and Isr. H. slang.  Problems of the
word's semantic history remain.  It must have entered Y. at
an early date, but was it already used figuratively when
borrowed, or did the fig. use develope in Y.? At the
beginning of the 20th c. in Germany at least, among the
speakers of Jewish German (which contained many words from
WY) _klafte_ was a playful designation for a woman who
henpecked her husband.  It must have entered Isr. H. slang
(by which I always mean informal speech) through both Jew.
German and EY speakers.  One would need to interview a lot
of people to ascertain this for certain, but the word in
Isr. H. seems a bit closer to USA _bitch_ , though not
quite as harsh.

It is interesting that _klafte_ rather than the more
transparent _kelefte_ became current.  Heb. didn't borrow
Aram. _klavto_ as a doublet for _kalba_.  As in many other
instances, H. reimported a word of H-A. origin via Yiddish.
Presumably in the Aram. word the final unstressed komets
aleph becomes a shwa /klafte/.  Bob's comment that scholars
suggest the "proper" pron. is /kalb'ta/ raises the question
how the vowel dropped out of the first syllable inAram.
Syncopation is common enough, but are there comparable
instances of /klafte/ < /kalb'ta/in Yiddish?  It would be
interesting to know if if the Vaynraykh-Kats debate over
text-transmission vs. contant inheritance (yerushe) could
illuminate how the Aram. word got into Yiddish.
 
David Neal:

You are right that "orthography... bespeaks ideology,"
.e.g. as in the Soviet spelling codex vs. the traditional
spelling.  But your exs. show you are talking about
transcription, not orthography.  You are talking about the
way varieties of Hebrew (Isr. H., Ashkenazic H.) and
Yiddish are romanized.  In the specific Israeli context in
which I used the romanization _mezuza_ and _mezuzot_ --
which you object to -- these romanizations are appropriate,
being representations of Isr. H.  In a Yiddish context I
would follow your suggestion and practice -- you are one of
the people who understands the importance of correct
transcription -- and write _mezuze_, _mezuzes_  and in an
Ashk. Whole H. context I would write _mezuzo_, _mezuzos_.

I heartily agree that the way one romanizes Jew.langs. is
significant.  The mistakes can reflect plain lack of
knowledge, a desire to simplify matters by following
whatever spelling seems prevalent, or something more --
perhaps even a confusion in defining and ordering one's
Jewish values, a confusion  over what is "Jewish", what
"Israeli ", what "yidishkeyt", etc.

Certain romanizations of Jew. langs. reflect value
confusion rather than consciously-motivated symbolic
political acts. B. Harshav's use of Isr. H. in place of
Ash. Whole H. transcriptions in his recent _The Meaning of
Yiddish_ was a mistake in my opinion, and we should
discuss.  It was not necessarily an act of cultural
imperialism.

The Jewish language wars are over and today we need to
respect each and every religio-ethno-cultural "territory"
within the pluralistic Jewish commonwealth. This is another
reason why we need to transcribe accurately --so as to deal
fairly with the marvelously revernacularized modern Hebrew
world, the still vibrant religio-cultural sphere of
Ashkenazic Hebrew and the declining yet ever-resurging
Yiddish-language domain. For great Yiddish scholars like
Niger and Sadan, we had one literature in two languages.
Even linguistically, there is no firm divide between the
language boundaries of Hebrew and Yiddish.  And, of course,
ver s'ken nit ka ivre iz an amorets.  And none of us know
enough.

Yude-Leyb Proger

 
2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 21 Feb 92 10:28:03 EST
From: rmt51@cas.bitnet
Subject: RE: Mendele Vol 1.179

Regarding Martin Davis's observation of unaccented final
Yiddosh vowels being degraded into long E:  I also observed
it in Boston when I moved there from New York almost thirty
years ago, and found it the epitome of something to "set
one's teeth on edge."  It seems to me as though the speaker
might be confusing such final vowels with (English)
diminutives or child language.
 
Bravo to Bob Werman on his bemoaning the lack of background
in Yiddishkeit among many of Mendele's contributors.  As a
"frummie" myself I am appalled at the general level of
ignorance.  The problem, of course, is how to transmit that
aspect of the language in the absence of a religious
environment.  I have yet to find a solution.
 
        Rick (Ruvn-Mendl) Turkel

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Fri, 21 Feb 92 16:24:21 GMT
From: me@SUZUKA.U-STRASBG.FR
Subject: RE:  Mendele Vol 1.179, 4)

I concur with what Bob Werman has to say about Yiddishkeit,
although not religious myself. I get a feeling of deep
sorrow and chagrin to see what  Jews and Yiddish have
become in the U.S., nay in the world. But you Americans
are supposed to have received the heritage and to be the
biggest jewish community.
 
As for the aramaic origin of 'klafte' I am not so sure,
although I am sure Reb Werman is much more savant than I
shall ever be. The reason is quite simple: as I wrote to
the list, all Hebrew words in segol-segol (eg kelev,
deleth, melekh etc) originate from the form in patah- (or
kamats?) shevah (and/or the converse), ie kalb (or klab).
Moreover in `Had Gadyah, the dog is 'kalba' (terminal
letter: aleph): "dehikkah lekalba, denashakh leshunra,
etc".
 
Finally, please stop the hebrew-baiting (cf the discussion
about 'mezuzah') if you do not like yiddish-baiting -- and
I confess that when I hear some israelis do that I get
quite upset -- although I did hear about the Canaanite
movement.

 ==m-n

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol 1.182

