
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 5.140
October 12, 1995

1) Standards and dialects (Rick Gildemeister)
2) Newly published books (Zachary Baker)
3) Dialects and Khsidim (David Herskovic)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 12 Oct 95 09:13:18 EDT
From: eeglc%cunyvm.bitnet@yalevm.cis.yale.edu
Subject: Standards and dialects

I've read the discussion on Standards and Dialects. I remember Zellig
Bach's admonition that speaking or learning a standard is a matter of
self-respect. People have said that Yiddish will wither away as a natural
spoken language except in certain closed section like the khsidim, and
the language that will remain among the nit-khsidishe yidn will be the
klal shprakh (hope I interpreted that correctly). The klal shprakh was
put together and is to a large extent a language that is no one's native
tongue. I believe Masha Leon of the Forward said she grew up it Warsaw
but used the klal shprakh (by which I assume she means in her family they
said puter, shutef, meshune, and not piter, shitef, and meshine). I
understand what Khayem Bokhner is trying to say about if you're going to
speak a dialect, speak the "whole" dialect consistently. However, as
Ellen Prince discussed once on the "Forverts shu" (oops! I mean sho),
once a person speaking a non-standard dialect moves, he/ she may undergo
dialect shift. What I'm trying to add to Khayem's idea is that you can
take a snapshot of a dialect many times over a long period, and if it is
influenced by another dialect, you'll often find changes. Social factors
have a lot to do with it. For instance the litvish custom of saying s
instead of sh, originated somewhere and spread, then if I recall my
source correctly its territory began to shrink because of the stigma it
bore.

What needs to be added is social class. The balebatim in a community may
speak one way and the proste yidn another. Only in America! (where
everyone is part of the amorphous, spurious middle class).

Rick Gildemeister

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Thu, 12 Oct 95 09:46:24 PDT
From: bm.yib@rlg.stanford.edu
Subject: Newly published books

I would like to bring to the attention of Mendelyaner (Mendelayt?) two
newly received books in German:

Israela Klayman-Cohen.  Die hebraeische Komponente im Westjiddischen am
Beispiel der Memoiren der Glueckel von Hameln.  Hamburg:  Helmut Buske
Verlag, 1994.  viii, 204 p.  Vol. 4 of the series "Jidische schtudies."
ISBN 3-87548-076-7

W. B. Lockwood.  Lehrbuch der modernen jiddischen Sprache; mit
ausgewaehlten Lesestuecken.  Hamburg:  Helmut Buske Verlag, 1995. xiii,
249 p.  ISBN 3-87118-987-1

The Lockwood book contains dedications to his father-in-law, Josef
Schwarcz, and his daughter, Vera Lockwood Baviskar (who participated in
work on the Language and Culture Atlas of Ashkenazic Jewry, who died in
1987, at the age of only 41).

Zachary Baker

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: 12 Oct 95 13:38:38 EDT
From: 100114.750@compuserve.com
Subject: Dialects and Khsidim

As a member of one of the khasidishe communities I must admit to finding
the debate over 'correct' dialects slightly droll and quaint. I am sure
many khasidim given the chance would share my views.

An Oxford don using the kind of English found in 18th century novels or
in the King James Bible would rightly be considered an old fogey. This is
because languages are living organisms that change and adapt rather than
museum exhibits. It is one thing to study the usage of language in times
bygone. It is quite another to suggest that that is the only authentic
version which must withstand sociological and geographical changes.

The khasidishe and ultra frime communities are the _only_ communities
where yidish continues to be mame loshen in the true sense of the word.
There are thousands of boys and girls who know no other language. While
this may be lamented from an educational point of view (mendele would
definitely not be happy) it is they in the end who carry the language
forward. I sense a certain imfarginekhz in the the haughty manner
yidishisten sometimes look down at these groups. After all it is the
secularists and apikorsim who built the medine and in a ruthless way
tried to annihilate and obliterate any mention of yidish while it is
their ultra-orthodox brethren, so often the subject of scorn and
ridicule, who have steadfastly stuck to yidish as if it were given on
barg sinay.

The subject of 'correct' dialect therefore carries no weight with us. My
father happens to be a minkacher and speaks a karpatisher yidish while in
khayder and yeshive I mixed with kids from ingerishe, poylishe and
galizyane backgrounds. Nobody ever mentions the slight differences for
the simple reason that nobody cares. I am a Londoner and speak in that
accent. When I switch on the radio and hear a Scottish presenter I may
note the difference with which he or she pronounces various words the
first time but after that he is just speaking English. Besides, because
of the nature of languages the accents and dialects are categorised more
as londener, antverpene, vilyamsburge, boro parker or benay beraker and
yerisholaymer. One can still detect the parents background but this is
gradually disappearing.

One must also remember that whole passages in some of the works of
mendele are almost rendered incomprehensible because of their Russian
content. Though sholem alaykhem is not as 'bad' he still makes constant
use of Russian words that were used in those days in conjunction with
yidish. Nobody however calls it ridish or yussian. Payshe motels mother
who is the most obstinate of the family in sticking to yidish also uses
voken for gayn and other words, towards the end.

I admit that papers like 'der yid' are not up to scratch but that has as
much to do with the fact that many of their journalists, if we can call
them that, can't write as with their command of the full vocabulary of
the language. Has anyone here heard of Yom-Tev Erlikh? His yiddish is up
to scratch his accent is a saftige Russian-litvish resulting in 36
cassettes which are a nakhes to listen to.

One more point if I may. The beauty of yidish literature and language
IMHO lies alot in the intertwining of psikim of tenakh and pieces of
gemore and rashi. Take that out and it loses much of it's spark. Mendele
knew this. So did sholem alaykhem, peyrez and yizkhok bashevis. (I don't
know about khaym yankel :-). This kind of yidish still exists in
khasidishe communities where kids learn little else but khimish
mishnayyes and gemore. The yidish of those unfamiliar with these great
works unfortunately lacks this essential ingredient.

Just to give a small example. es kimt mir a mazel tov. s'iz ba mir
geboyren gevoren a yingel. der bris is geveyzen eyrev sikes in ikh hob em
a nomen gegeyben yisroel yakev. rifen vet men em sruli. yisroel is nokh a
zayde in yakev is rayshis kol val es is ayns fin de shpizen ober okh val
der kharakter fin yakev gefelt mir shtark. er is azoy vi der yid fin der
shteytel imer optimistish afili in shark negative umshtanden.

al kol ponim fratik zi nakhts hob ikh gemakht a zokher vi men get far di
gest arbes. shabes zifri kimt zi mir zi a yid nokhen davenen in freykt
mir "nu, men ken zogen loy nishar arbe eykhod? azons ken nor freygen a
khayder graduate!

David Herskovic

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 5.140

