
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 5.266
March 6, 1996

1) Sholem-Aleykhem's _Kenig Pik_ (Part 2) (Leonard Prager)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 13 Feb 96 21:42:39 IST
From: rhle302@uvm.haifa.ac.il
Subject: Sholem-Aleykhem's _Kenig Pik_

                                2

We can now return to the Goodblatt manuscript of _Kenig Pik_ and try to
identify it as closely as posslble.  Sholem-Aleykhem spoke of a revised
edition of the play sent to _Der groyser kundes_.  On examining the play
printed in that journal [3:6 (February 10, 1911), 8-10; 3:7 (February 17,
1911), 8-10], we find that it is virtually identical with that of the
Goodblatt manuscript.  This is important in understanding the textual history
of _Kenig Pik_.  There is every reason to believe that the revised edition
represents the author's last word on the play and has priority over earlier
variants in a critical edition of Sholem-Aleykhem's works (such as was
planned, with its center at the Hebrew University, but apparently has been at
least temporarily abandoned).  Moreover, the Goodblatt manuscript is almost
certainly the copytext for the revised version published in _Der groyser
kundes_.  The manuscript is also more complete than the printed version (e.g.,
it recovers the interesting line, "guryeve kashe, telyatshene nozke _ _
pfui!," which would otherwise be lost __ see footnote 15).

The Sholem-Aleykhem Archives has a typescript of _Kenig Pik_, which is dated
January 21, 1911 and which is stamped with the Russian censor's seal.  This is
apparently the copy submitted for permission to publish the play separately
and it corresponds exactly to the Familyen-biblyotek edition of Warsaw, 1912.
This editlon is also that of the twenty-eight-volume Folksfond Edition (New
York, 1917-1923), from which many later editions (including the Ikuf edition,
1952-1959) derive. With minor differences pointing to regional variants (e.g.
_nit_ / _nisht_), the Warsaw 1912 typescript and the Folksfond versions are
also identical with the edition which appeared in the _Yudishe ilustrirte
tsaytung_ [No. 50 (December 30. 1910), 11-12].  To summarize, there are two
basic versions, the original represented by (1) the typescript (probably typed
by Berkovitsh directly from Sholem-Aleykhem's manuscript or a copy of it) and
a number of editions identical to it and (2) the revised version, represented
by the Goodblatt manuscript and the _Groyser kundes_ edition virtually
identical to it.  The Goodblatt manuscript contains the work of two copyists
employed by Sholem-Aleykhem to copy his original manuscript together with
last-minute corrections and additions characteristically made by the author in
red ink.  One of the copyists may have been working from dictation (as
indicated by his unusual spelling of the word _kloymersht_).(12)

The Goodblatt manuscript of _Kenig Pik_ belonged to the late Rabbi Morris
Solomon Goodblatt (HaRov Moyshe-Shloyme Gutblat), a native of Mlawa, Poland
(and thus a _landsman_ of Yoysef Opatoshu) who lived in New York between 1911
and 1927, when he moved to Philadelphia.  He was well acquainted with Moyshe
Nadir, who was a good friend of Sholem-Aleykhem; according to an
unsubstantiated family tradition it was from Moyshe Nadlr that Rabbi Goodblatt
bought the manuscript.  In addition to being a friend of Sholem-Aleykhem,
Moyshe Nadir worked for _Der Groyser kundes_.  The Goodblatt family has also
ralsed the possibility that the manuscript was purchased from Opatoshu and not
from Nadir.  In any event, the tradition, which related to a manuscript, would
not have been perpetuated had there not been some basis for it.

The manuscript, however, 1s not a holograph.  One could call it a _merograph_
-- a manuscript partly in the hand of the author.  When we look at the first
page of the Goodblatt manuscript, we see an asterisk in red ink which directs
us to a two-line insertion, a1so in red ink, that runs down the length of the
rlght-hand margln.  It reads "Di uffirung fun dizn eynakter in nyu-york iz
ibergegebn funem oytor oysshlislekh tsu di progresiv dramatik klub" ('The
production of thls one-acter 1n New York is transferred by the author to the
Progressive Dramatlc Club exclusively').(13) The identical footnote appears in
the printed _Der groyser kundes_ edltion of _Kenig Pik_.(14) It is logical to
infer that the newspaper copied the footnote from the Goodblatt manuscript,
which served as its copytext.  As mentioned above, one of the lines omitted in
the newspaper can be restored only through the Goodblatt manuscript.(15)

Zilbertsvayg may not have found a record of a _Kenig Pik_ performance, but
Sholem-Aleykhem assigned the play's New York production rights to the amateur
repertory theater, the Progressive Dramatic Club (which apparently showed
interest) because he regarded the script as playable. We do not know,
unfortunately, know whether or not the amateur group, which had regular play
readings as well as public performance, staged the play.  The Russian-language
elements of the play would not have created problems, since the audience and
actors of the Club were largely Russian Jews.  When the Yiddish repertory was
exhausted, the Club performed Chekhov one-acters in Russian.  This is not the
place to discuss Sholem-Aleykhem's relations with the amateur group, which in
1909 successfully staged his _Tsezeyt un tseshpreyt_.  More germane to my
purpose here is that Sholem-Aleykhem changed the text in order to make it more
lively and, thus, more stageworthy.  Nothing is more characteristic of our
author _ _ and nothing more important for his editors to keep in mind _ _ than
his constant revision of his work, even after publication.  This is well
known, of course, but we need to keep it fresh in our minds.

A parallel to what I believe occurred with _Kenig Pik_ is explained by
Sholem-Aleykhem himself in his introduction to the second edition of _Tsezeyt
un tseshpreyt_:  "Mit eynike yor tsurik hot zikh gedrukt fun mir a felyeton in
der _Yidisher folkstsaytung_ unter dem nomen _Tsezeyt un tseshpreyt / bilder
funem yidishn lebn_.  Hagam di dozike bilder zenen geshribn in a dramatisher
forem, dokh hot zikh mir afile nit gekholemt, az ikh vel amol zoykhe zayn tsu
zen zey ufgefirt af der stsene.... itst, ba der tsveyter oyflage, tsum uffirn
zi af der yidisher bine, hob ikh zi genumen tsu oysbesern."  ('Several years
ago a feuilleton of mine entitled _Scattered and Dispersed / Scenes of Jewish
Life_ appeared in the _Yidishe folkstsaytung_ ('Jewish People's Newspaper')
Though these scenes are written in dramatic form, I never even dreamed that I
would ever live to see them produced....  Now, for the second edition, with
staging in the Yiddish theater in mind, I have begun to improve the
play.')(16)

Berkovitsh tells us that "Gants oft flegt er far zayn arbet haltn an
ibershrayber...  Ba vikhtike verk iz dem ibershrayber oysgekumen tsulib di
oysbeserungen un baarbetungen eyn zakh ibertsushraybn etlekhe mol. Un ersht
nokh dem, az di zakh iz shoyn geven avekgeshikt in der redaktsye arayn, flegt
Sholem-Aleykhem zikh nemen zipn di kopye, vos er hot ibergelozt far zikh,
oyszukhn naye stilistishe oder vezntlekhe khesroynes un farvarfn di redaktsye
mit briv un telegrames vegn tikunim 1nem manuskript, eyder es geyt in druk.
Tsu dem tsvek hot er in yeder redaktsye zikh oysgekukt a noentn ufmerkzamen
mentshn, vemen er hot gekont ontroyen aza shlikhes."  ('Sholem-Aleykhem quite
frequently employed a copyist....  The latter often had to recopy important
works several times.  Even after the work had been dispatched to an editor,
Sholem-Aleykhem would go through hls manuscript with a flne-toothed comb,
finding stylistic or substantive faults and start bombarding the editor with
letters and telegrams to make last-minute corrections.  For this purpose, in
every editorial office he sought out an attentive person to whom he could
entrust these last-minute changes'}.(17)

Leonard Prager

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 5.266

Mendele has 2 rules:

	1. Provide a meaningful Subject: line
	2. Sign your article (full name please)

Send articles to:
    mendele@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

Send change-of-status messages to:
    listserv@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

        a. For a temporary stop: set mendele nomail
        b. To resume delivery: set mendele mail
        c. To subscribe: sub mendele first_name last_name
        d. To unsubscribe kholile: unsub mendele

Other business:
    nmiller@mail.trincoll.edu

              ****Getting back issues****

1. Anonymous ftp archives are available.

ftp ftp.mendele.trincoll.edu
    in the directory pub/mendele/files

    A table of contents is also available, along with weekly updates.

2. Mendele archives can also be reached as follows:

via WWW:
    http://sunsite.unc.edu/yiddish/mewais.html

via gopher:
    gopher://sunsite.unc.edu/11/../.pub/academic/languages/yiddish/mendele

via ftp:
    ftp://sunsite.unc.edu/pub/academic/languages/yiddish/mendele



