
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 3.142
November 23, 1993

1) Geshikhte fun yidishn teater (Michael Steinlauf)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue Nov 23 15:28:05 1993
From: M_Steinlauf@ACAD.FANDM.EDU (Michael Steinlauf)
Subject: Geshikhte fun yidishn teater

Khosheve Mendelnikes,

Ikh shik aykh tsu a barikht vegn dem ershtn konferents gevidmet di
geshikhte fun yidishn teater in Poyln, vos iz forgekumen in Varshe
mit a khoydesh tsurik.

Al dos guts,
Mikhl

        International Conference on Jewish Theater in Poland

        An unprecedented scholarly event, the first international
conference devoted to the history of Jewish theater, was held in
Poland on October 18-21, 1993.  Twenty-seven papers were presented
by scholars from Poland, the United States, Israel, Germany,
Ukraine and Italy.  The conference was organized by the Theater
Department of the University of Lodz and the Polish Society of
Theater Historians under the auspices of the Polish Ministry of
Culture, and was held at the Aleksander Zelwerowicz State Theater
School in Warsaw.  Papers were simultaneously translated into
English and Polish.

        The conference took place on the heels of the publication
 earlier this year of Volume 41 of the Polish theater history
 journal Pamietnik Teatralny.  This five hundred page issue,
 entirely devoted to research on the history of Jewish theater in
 Poland until 1939, is the first such publication since Jacob
 Shatzky edited the Arkhiv far der Geshikhte fun Yidishn Teater un
 Drame (Archives for the History of Jewish Theater and Drama) in
 New York in 1928.

        Coinciding with the conference was a festival of Jewish
culture that included the screening of pre-war Yiddish films made in
Poland and Ukraine, talks by Polish Jewish writers, and
performances by Yiddish singers and theater troupes from throughout
the world.

        The conference was opened on Monday afternoon, October 18,
 with the screening of two films: Aktor (1993), a film about Michal
 Szwejlich of the20 Polish State Yiddish Theater, made by Krystyna
 Bevis-Shmeruk and Irena Kamienska, and Jej Teatr (Her Theater,
 1967), a film about Ida Kaminska made by Wladyslaw Forbert.  The
 rest of the afternoon was devoted to a talk by the legendary
 Yiddish theater director Jakob Rotbaum of Wroclaw, who began his
 professional career staging Eugene O'Neill with the Vilna Troupe
 in 1930.  Mr. Rotbaum reviewed his early years in theater, which
 included studies in Moscow with Meyerhold and Shlomo Mikhoels, and
 emphasized the importance of theater as an agent of education and
 social change.

        The first paper was presented on Tuesday morning, October
 19, by the conference organizer, Professor Anna Kuligowska-
 Korzeniewska, Director of the Department of Drama and Theater at
 the University of Lodz, and President of the Polish Society of
 Theater Historians.  Professor Kuligowska stressed the need to
 approach Yiddish theater, which was once performed in every corner
 of Poland, without either sentimental or ideological lenses, in
 order to "track the traces of the great and vanishing culture with
 which fate has linked us."  Her paper was followed by that of the
 academic consultant to the conference, Professor Chone Shmeruk of
 Jerusalem, who reviewed Yiddish dramatic literature created up to
 World War I.  Professor Shmeruk began with an analysis of why this
 literature did not develop until the 16th century, and then
 discussed the first Purim plays, early modern biblical and
 Enlightenment dramas, the rise of professional Yiddish theater
 under Abraham Goldfaden, and the contributions of the "classical"
 Yiddish writers, Mendele Mokher Seforim, Sholem Aleichem and Y. L.
 Peretz.  Mr. Jozef Gelston (Lvov) traced the history of the Broder
 Singers, several generations of peripatetic Galician musicians,
 singers and jesters (originally associated with Ber Morgulis of
 Brody) from the late nineteenth century until the Holocaust.
 Professor Jan Michalik (Krakow) closed the morning session
 presenting press and archival research documenting the first
 performances of Yiddish theater in Krakow in the late 1880's.

        The afternoon session began with a paper by Dr. Maria
Stykowa (Lublin) chronicling Yiddish amateur theater in Lublin from
1864-1916. Dr. Maria Prussak (Warsaw) examined demonstrations by
Jewish students at the turn of the century in Warsaw and other
Polish cities protesting the staging of certain antisemitic Polish
plays.  Her paper was followed by that of the conference secretary,
Dr. Malgorzata Leyko of Lodz, who chronicled the work of Yitzhak
Zandberg, who directed the first permanent Yiddish theater in Lodz
from 1907-16.  Professor Keren Goldberg (Los Angeles) closed the
afternoon session with an overview of the development of Yiddish
theater in Poland and its meaning for us today.

        The morning session on October 20 began with a paper by Ms.
 Elinor Rubel (Jerusalem) on popular Yiddish theater (the so-called
 "shund theater") based on a study of the performances of Avrom
 Fishzon's traveling company at the turn of the century.  Focusing
 on Y. L. Peretz's theater writings in Warsaw after 1905, Professor
 Michael Steinlauf (Philadelphia) proposed a model for exploring the
 "kunst/shund" (high/low) distinction introduced by Peretz into
 Yiddish theater discourse.  Professor Michael Taub (New York) then
 presented an analysis of the social issues raised by Peretz in his
 one-act plays, contrasting this body of work with his stories and
 full-length plays.  Professor Kazimierz Nowacki (Krakow) chronicled
 Yiddish theater activity, both popular and dramatic, professional
 and amateur, in the cities and towns of Galicia during the interwar
 period. 20 Closing the morning session was a paper by Mr.
 Mieczyslaw Abramowicz (Gdansk) focusing on the little-known
 activity of Yiddish theaters in Danzig during the first years of
 Nazi rule (1934-38).

        The afternoon session began with a paper by Mr. Jozef
 Weichert of Tel Aviv (read by Dr. Marek Bielacki of Lodz)
 discussing aspects of his father Mikhal Weichert's work with the
 avantgarde Yiddish company Yung Teater (Young Theater) which he
 directed in the 1930's.  Professor Zbigniew Osinski (Warsaw)
 surveyed the little-known work of the Hebrew Theater Studio in
 Vilna from 1927-33, and its close relations with Juliusz Osterwa's
 Reduta Theater.  Focusing on the reactions of the Polish and
 Polish-Jewish press to Habima's three tours of Poland (1926, 1930,
 1936), Ms. Katarzyna Lezenska (Warsaw) presented a contribution to
 social as well as theater history.  Professor Eleonora Udalska
 (Katowice) analyzed Polish-language productions of Anski's The
 Dybbuk during the interwar period, focusing on differences between
 the styles of Yiddish and Polish productions.  Dr. Jan Ciechowicz
 (Gdansk) surveyed the writings on Yiddish and Polish theater that
 appeared in the popular Polish-language Jewish weekly Opinia,
 published in Warsaw from 1933-35.

        The morning session on October 21 began with a paper by Ms.
Brigitte Dalinger of Vienna (read by Ms. Kowalska) documenting the
origins of Yiddish theater in Vienna during the last years of the
nineteenth century, and comparing its development to that of Yiddish
theater further east.  On the basis of research in the contemporary
German Jewish press, Ms. Heide Riss (Munich) chronicled the
activity of Polish Yiddish actors and companies in Berlin from the
early 1920's to 1933.  Professor Liana Tedeschi (Milan) analyzed
the powerful mediating function of Yiddish theater in New York at
the turn of the century, and suggested its displacement of the
synagogue as the social and spiritual center of Jewish life.
Professor Marta Meducka (Kielce) traced the effects of the Yiddish
popular repertory developed in the late nineteenth century in the
United States on Yiddish theater activity in Poland in the early
twentieth century and between the wars.  Professor Edward Krasinski
(Warsaw) closed the morning session with a survey of the many forms
of contact and collaboration between Polish and Jewish actors,
directors, scenographers, audiences, theater critics and instructors
during the interwar years.

        The afternoon session began with a paper by Dr. Ruta
Sakowska (Warsaw) on Jewish theater activity in the Warsaw Ghetto,
focusing on the most ambitious of these effors, Mark Arnshteyn's
Polish-language Nowy Teatr Kameralny (New Chamber Theater).  This
was followed by two papers devoted to Ida Kaminska's activities in
post-war Poland.  Analyzing recently accessible government
documents, Ms. Joanna Krakowska-Narozniak (Warsaw) documented the
vicissitudes of Kaminska's efforts to continue staging Yiddish
theater in communist Poland.  Ms. Danuta Gibas (Krakow) explored
Kaminska's collaboration with the Polish director Konrad Swinarski
in his productions of plays by Brecht and DA8urrenmatt in Warsaw in
the early 1960's.  Dr. Marian Fuks (Warsaw) closed the session with
a paper chronicling the development of Jewish musical theater.

       The conference concluded with an appearance by Mr. Shmuel
Atzmon, director of the Yiddish Theater of Israel, who discussed
the development of this theater over the past two decades, and
screened video excerpts from recent productions.

        The conference organizers plan to publish the complete
proceedings of the conference in Polish, and anticipate an English
version as well.20 46or further information about the conference,
contact Dr. Malgorzata Leyko, Katedra Teorii Literatury, Teatru i
Filmu Uniwersytetu Lodzkiego, ul. Sienkiewicz 21, 90-114 Lodz,
Poland, fax: 011 4842 78 39 58; or Dr. Michael Steinlauf,
Department of History, Franklin and Marshall College, Lancaster, PA
17604-3003; tel: (717) 291-4288; fax: (717) 399-4413;e-mail:
M_Steinlauf@acad.FandM.edu

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 3.142

Mendele has 2 rules:

	1. Provide a Subject: line.
	2. Sign your article.

Send submissions/responses to:

        mendele@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu

Other business:

        nmiller@starbase.trincoll.edu

Anonymous ftp archives available on:

        ftp.mendele.trincoll.edu
        in the directory pub/mendele/files




