
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 6.145
December 17, 1996

1) A Slavonic component? (Jota Piasecki)
2) Dictionaries (Joachim Neugroschel)
3) Zakh/zikh (Al Grand)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 17 Dec 1996 02:00:02 +0100
From: jpi@it.lth.se
Subject: A Slavonic component?

In Mendele Vol. 6.142-(3) Zellig Bach wrote:

      In another post (1.138,3) he [Joachim Neugroschel - jp] wrote:
      "The component  tongues of Yiddish -- German, Hebrew, Polish,
      etc."  This statement, too, is partly misleading.  The three main
      components of Yiddish are:  German, Hebrew-Aramaic, and Slavic.
      Polish is part of the _general_ Slavic component (that includes
      Belorussian, Ukrainian, Polish, and Russian), and is _not_ a main
      component by itself, as it would seem from the .. passage.

I am unable to see what is wrong with JN's phrase ("component
_tongues_ of Yiddish -- German, Hebrew, Polish, etc.") or, in fact, how
it would be contradicted by [ZB's]: "The three _main_ components of
Yiddish are: German, Hebrew-Aramaic, and Slavic" (Slavonic - jp).

Joachim Neugroschel writes about different component _languages_, and
does not assert the languages cited by him, among them Polish, being the
_main_ components.  What he wrote seems quite obvious, Polish being among
the components languages of Yiddish. There is no way to read into his
words for Polish language to be one of the _main_ components.

Zellig Bach asserts (after a source, it seems) that there are three
_main_ components of Yiddish and that one of them is [a component
called] Slavic [? must be Slavonic. Slavic people - but Slavonic
tongues].

But there is no such thing as a Slavonic language in general - it is an
abstraction over a group of languages, and this abstraction cannot have
any influence over the non-Slavonic Yiddish. As well as it would be
strange to say that one of the three main components of Yiddish is (not
German, but...) Anglo-Saxon; whose _part_ only is German :=).  As German
language, and not the _general_ Anglo-Saxon, is a (the main :=)
component of Yiddish, so the real languages from the Slavonic group, as
Belorussian, Ukrainian, Polish, and Russian are _the_ linguistic
components of (even though I would prefer call them influences in)
Yiddish, and there is nothing to do about it.

It is evident. So Zellig Bach's (or his source's) somewhat curious
formula must have another meaning than just stating known facts; I
gather it could be stressing the message that German and Hebrew-Arameic
are the _true_ or important components of Yiddish and are not to be put
on the level with any other languages as the Slavonic ones.

But is this not obvious, too?  I never heard anything else than Yiddish
being - leaving aside the strong Hebrew-Arameic impact on it which I am
not competent to precise - a language with structure, grammar and
primary vocabulary all German, and with - massive, but only as
_vocabulary_ loans go - borrowing from Polish, Russian, other Slavonic
languages. I can be in error, but I belive no Slavonic syntax
peculiarities were ever grafted on Yiddish. I would guess there were
historical reasons for it - as when Yiddish began be spoken on Slavic
lands, the language being already formed. What has happended since - and
gone through centuries - was only borrowing freely from the vocabulary
of the native population. A process similar to the present borrowing
terms from English by every language on the globe. Such loans do not
change the structure of a language; I do not think the linguists
everewhere conclude that English became a component of all
borrower-languages.

So maybe this, for Yiddish both massive and secondary, role of Slavonic
languages in it have been the reason in Zellig Bach' sentence for naming
as a third 'main' 'component' of Yiddish the 'Slavic' one. But it seems
linguistically clumsy and otherwise unnecessary. It would be fairer to
state that there are _two_ main components of Yiddish, and let the
relevant Slavonic languages be no components at all, but influences -
namely, on Yiddish vocabulary. Then one can if needed to sort those
languages on some spectrum (not so more of the strenght of the influence
as of the number of influences), and try to count, say, if Polish or
Russian had more influence(s :=). But it seems a vain endavour; both's
influence had plausibly the same impact - mere loan of words.  It is up
to a future computer dictionary to count the number of words' of
Polish/Russian extraction and to decide about the `role' of which.

Until this is done, on the historical and demografical grounds I would
not exclude a possibility of a living majority of Yiddish speakers with
large parts of foreign vocabulary of Polish origin. So what?

It is I would think a good Yiddish. And there are, I am said, Yiddish
influences on Polish, too.  Much en vogue in Poland of the 50's word
'fajny' is said to be such an influence.  Any truth to it?

Jota Piasecki

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 17 Dec 1996 00:06:19 -0500 (EST)
From: achim1@cris.com
Subject: Dictionaries

In regard to the dictionaries one needs for reading Yiddish, Hugh Denman
was quite right in pointing out more useful lexicons.  in my posting I
had actually talked about the dictionaries I have at my side when
reading M. Weinreich's History and--foolishly--I omitted the Groyser
Verterbukh, which I use constantly.  But I should really acquire a white
russian and a ukrainian dictionary.

In regard to Zellig Bach's opinion [6.142] that such dictionaries are
necessary basically only for the professional translator, I'm afraid I
can't agree.   I dont translate most of the books I read;  but while I
can get along with a single multi-volume dictionary for either french,
german, or italian, I certainly need a dozen dictionaries for reading
Weinreich's History, and at least half a dozen for reading even a modern
Yiddish novel--Harkavy and Weinreich are excellent but inadequate, and I
have to consult my Hebrew, Polish and Russian dictionaries (and soon,
under Hugh's inspiration my Ukrainian and Byelo-Russian) just for
reading Yiddish books for fun (if you can call it fun:  thumbing through
a dozen different reference books just to understand a regional word for
"chaff" or "bike" or whatever).

I think we should encourage readers to use dictionaries constantly
rather than limiting them to professionals.

and yes, I use my OED or my Webster's all the time, I can't even read a
current american novel without occasionally stumbling over an unfamiliar
regionalism or technical term or new slang (not yet in any dictionary).
and when I flip through a dictionary of 1970s slang, I can't remember
half the words that are listed.

Joachim Neugroschel

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 17 Dec 1996 08:36:06 -0500
From: savoyid@aol.com
Subject: Zakh/zikh: a plea for simplicity

I asked two simple questions and received some convoluted responses that
didn't respond to what I wanted to know but went merrily along into the
semantic stratosphere thus going well beyond my (admittedly) not very
important and modest inquiry.  So I'll try again:

I would simply like to know (1) if the use of the reflexive _zakh_ is as
admissible in standard Yiddish as _zikh_ and (2) wouldn't the diphthong
_oy_ with an umlaut over the "o" be pronounced exactly the same as _oy_
minus the umlaut?  And if so, then what function does the umlaut serve
in Olsvanger's use of it in such words as _royte_ , Moyshe_ etc.?

Ikh bet aykh, alemen fun di universitetn, hot af mir a bisl rakhmones.
Kh'bin dokh a poshete mentsh.  Please give me a simple answer!

Al Grand

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 6.145

