Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 1 no. 20
June 11, 1991
 
1) Mostly to Leonard Prager and a query (Mikhl Herzog)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Mon, 10 Jun 91  19:58 EDT
From: ZOGUR@CUVMB.BITNET
Subject: Mekhutn, etc.

1) In reply to Leonard Prager [Vol 1.17]. Concerning
"vos biste mir far a mekhutn?":
 
Leonard:
 
     Reyshis, biste gerekht; The sentence  "Vos bistu
mir far a mekhutn" is better translated 'Who [or what]
are you to me?' If I were writing a bilingual 
phraseological dictionary, I'd say it just that way.
Now, where there's a reyshis there must follow a
 
     Sheynis; blayb ikh fort gerekht. After all, I
wasn't translating the expression. I was offering UW's
English gloss, 'pretender' whose meaning is delimited
by an example of usage; i.e., probably not 'pretender
to the throne' (How would you say that in Yiddish?);
something you'd expect to find in a bilingual college
dictionary, s.v. mekhutn.
 
     If we were writing a truly sophisticated defining
dictionary, a la the OED, I'd try to work in everything
you said ("expresses rejection of familiarity, close-
ness or intimacy which is in some way seen as not being
bona fide, i.e. pretended, unearned, unjustified,
etc.") in a paragraph beginning "One who . . . ".
 
2) Leonard, I am not a mekhutn in matters pertaining to
literature. Nevertheless, I did like your translation.
In other word, a khazn bin ikh nit, nor a meyvn af
khazones bin ix yo. You sing well.
 
3) Leonard, as a mayvn on Shakespeare, what would you
have Ophelia say in the Yiddish translation in reply to
Hamlet's "Get thee to a nunnery? Shmuel Lapin,
olevasholem (whose father was himself a Yiddish poet
and translator of Shakespearean Ballads) proposed: "mit
eytses-toyves, adoyni prints, bin ikh shoyn,
borekhashem, bazorgt".
 
4) If there is a Slavist in the crowd, would anyone
propose a good English gloss for Yiddish
"onitses/onitshes" (first syllable stress). They are
'leg wrappings' (for warmth). Is there a better gloss?

______________________________________________________

End of Mendele Vol 1.020