
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 1 no. 40
July 5, 1991

1) ISAAC (Jascha Kessler) 

1)----------------------------------------------------

Date: Thu, 04 Jul 91 14:17 PDT
From: KESSLER <IME9JFK@UCLAMVS.BITNET>
Subject: RE "ISAAC"

this is not the hard story, this is a sweetly numinous
one, originally published as "The Blessing," but not
dubbed Isaac, perhaps a mistake, for my next book, 
SIREN SONGS, in 1992, which will be bound in with
CLASSICAL ILLUSIONS, my publisher thinks (McPherson &
Co). CLASSICAL ILLUSIONS came out in 1985, 28 stories ,
and a good number were Jewish, not Greek. so here is
ISAAC:  

ISAAC
 
 
by Jascha Kessler
 
 
Gray, cold skies. Old streets. Vacant lots and swamp
smell. Brooklyn. A visit. Immigrants, relatives on my
father's side. An old linoleum on the splintery floor,
roach-brown gashes where it has been scuffed away.
Oilcloth on the kitchen table, and flies on the oil-
cloth.  The feeling of dirt.

Not poverty, but dirt. A smell of unwashed bodies, or
clothes, or feet. Another  kind of smell, bitter and
sour. An old man sitting by himself at the window of an
empty room.  The window gazes onto an alley of broken
bottles and rusted cans, a stained mattress, its clump
s of stuffing dribbling out. A scabby mutt pokes its
muzzle through clotted, gelatinous newspa pers and a
rancid compost of cabbage stalks, pigeon feathers,
blackened, shrivelling orange rinds.  The room holds
only a sagging iron cot, bowlegged and rusty, unmade
sheets, rou gh blanket, dingy pillow. The old man,
wearing a black coat down to his ankles on this damp,
rheumy day and a heavy black homburg tipped back on his
bald, spotted head, the old man beckons me int o that
room with a lifted hand, crooked fingers urging me
towards him. He seems huge. He seems a massive shadow
hulking over the plain wooden chair in which he sits,
unmoving but for the fingers waggling at me. I stand
with locked knees, holding back, stubborn. My father
shoves me forward, his knuckles harsh between my shoul-
der blades, and shuts the door behind me.  It is only
today that I realize the family was in the other rooms.
I could hear them laughing, talking loudly: dinner was
about to be served. But then, there seemed to be no
sound at all.  Still hesitating, I lean stiffened
against the door that my father has closed firmly
behind me. I am betrayed. The silence thickens about
me. And the old man, without moving or eve n half-
turning round, beckons me. He seems to stare at the
windowsill. I hold my breath. Is he blind? His long
white beard is stained and blotchy gray around the
mouth, streaked tobacco-yellow down the chin. His thick
lower lip hangs pendulous.  The mouth is open; but he
is not breathing; or he's breathing so slowly it's
terrible to listen for the sound of his breath. White
payis join the beard from a fringe of shaggy hair
ringing his skull, hair white though singed yellow and
gray, those sidelocks dangling from beneath the scurfy
brim of his hat. His coat has a coll ar of dull black
lambswool, patchy and faded by age. His high black
shoes are cracked, worn paper-thin, tied with extra
string around the ankles. I can see his long underwear
splaying over the tops of his shoes, gray and dirty
cuffs of frayed cotton. Still he beckons me. I can
scarcely move.  Because I am aware that I had already
seen something even while I was led to that door, and
it had  frightened me. I force myself to inch down the
small room that seems to loom like a high-ceilinged,
endless corridor leading towards...what?  I cannot
imagine what, although I know somehow. And as I inch
ahead I seem to hear a small, still voice, a muffled
buzzing some-where in the silence. Then I see. He is
watching flies on the windowsill. And I realize that in
his other hand he holds upright a long, narrow, shining
knife. His left beckons to me; his right holds that
blade.  I see how the light glitters on its edge. How
keen it is. My heart is swollen; it pants in my chest. 
My heart hurts. But I go to him, scared, driven by a
will not mine, to face what I must face, an urge stron-
ger than fear.

And at last I stand beside him. His hands seem a
giant's. Huge-knuckled hands with folds of fine skin
over the lumpy, black ropes of veins. Those hands
cannot possibly belong to thi s old crippled man
sitting hunched in hoary age: those hands are not
stiff: those hands are alive and unafraid. I realize
then that although he's aware of me next to him, he is
not thinking about me, and certainly not thinking I
could be nauseated by his unwashed age, his garlic and
nicotine, his musty clothes, the sour felt, and damp,
greasy, furry stink.


His lap is strewn with shreds of tobacco and ashes of
burnt paper. On the floor lies a bag of Bull Durham
with his blew drawstring and yellow tag, and a packet
of Zig Zag cigarette papers. Dozens of bent stubs are
littered on the floor about his chair, one acridly
smoking by his heel. And still he shows no sign of
recognizing me; although that left arm is held up, its
fingers moving ever so slightly, moving me closer. His
hand now settles on my shoulder, a dead weight, and
grips me hard.  


I freeze.  It is flies --he contemplates flies. One
crawls along the sill, pausing yet continuing as though
impelled towards him: cautious, fearful, alert, hesi-
tating, hopping back and starting again. I see what the
old man is doing. Before him lies a lump of sugar
surrounded by more of them. Dead, though not crushed,
flies. Fragments, rather; bits and pieces: heads,
wings, legs lies plattered everywhere, some still
twitching, curling and snapping as if in agony. As this
latest victim, hungering, anxious, timid, nears the
sugar, something seems to trouble it. It should flit
off; yet it cannot. It is fixed on that sugar. It
smells the sweetness. Desire holds it there. It stops
and strokes its face. Preens its wings. That pause
proves fatal. The knife hovering in the air somewhere
far beyond its ken slashes invisibly down, so swift and
subtle that no sound, no tremor warns of its coming,
and its edge, honed to razor thinness, slices the fly
neatly in half. No mess of squashed thorax or mush of
fly guts. How does he do it? What knife is that, and
what hand?  

The old man half turns his face to me, and smiles. A
sweet, kindly smile. A smile that was there already,
had I been able to glimpse it. His contemplation had
always been a smiling one. His hand had not lost, his
right hand had not lost its cunning; nor yet his
bleared eyes their sharpness. And now the left hand
with which he had drawn me to him is lifted and laid
upon my head, which it covers with his warm, dry and
heavy palm. It is a kind hand, soft and knowing.  It
strokes my hair lightly, gentle despite its size and
weight. Pleased, he smiles a little wider from the
corners of his tobacco-fouled lips, and says, "Tzott!"
And his eyes beneath those shaggy, yellowed brows open
wide with a quiet hilarity.

Later I learned he was my father's great-uncle, and had
been a famous schochet.  The throats of innumerable
lambs, bulls, heifers and calves, rams and ewes, chick-
ens, geese, and turkeys had been honored by him swift-
ly, painlessly --slit by that same airy knife whose
work is ritually done before it is ever seen to lift
and flash, the hand descending before the heart has
beaten even once. He was retired, a refugee, an old
man, an old, old man squatting by the window sill,
waiting out his last days in that decayed, rented house
next to a dank and foggy Brooklyn canal. I know this
now. And I also know that for years I had forgotten
those smiling eyes, the kind hand laid upon my head as
though in benediction, and that blessing of ironic
triumph  on his lips, if blessing it was  - if it was
even meant for me.

"Tzott!"  
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol 1.40