
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 14.047
April 22, 2005

1) Words on Fire (Morrie Feller)
2) kuni-leml (Lucas Bruyn)
3) di yidishe shikse (Goldie Segal)

Visit Mendele on the Web: http://www.mendele.net

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: April 22, 2005
Subject: Words on Fire

I thought that my comments to Prof. Dovid Katz about his very
important and timely book might be of some interest to those who are
concerned with the present state of Yiddish, and the prospects for its
future. With his permission, I am presenting them here.

Morrie Feller
Phoenix

Sholem aleykhem, Prof. Katz!

As one who is very interested in the future of Yiddish, and of ways to
ensure a long future for Yiddish, I have read and saved pertinent articles
about this subject by some of the most prominent observers of the language.

For example, Prof. Ruth Wisse (Harvard) in the New Republic, May 27, 1996,
wrote an article entitled "Shule Daze" in which she states: "Language is
the expressive instrument of a community that is sufficiently separate to
sustain a separate language. Jews could only effect a Yiddish revival today
if they were prepared to `deassimilate' enough to regenerate their own
language. Having reaped the benefits of English, they are not likely to
conduct this experiment in reverse...The imagined Yiddish revival only
seems so benign because it ignores both the requirements and the
consequences of linguistic separation."

Then, in its Spring, 1998 issue, the Pakn Treger published your letter in
"a bintl briv" with the banner "Fear of a Yiddish Planet". This letter was
apparently the nucleus from which "Words on Fire" evolved. It made the
argument that Yiddish is perfectly safe in the hands of many Hasidic
communities scattered far and wide across the globe. You said: "What a
calamity it would be if we gave up on living Yiddish language and
literature, either because of trumped-up fears of being called
`Yiddishists' or because we have convinced ourselves that it cannot be
done. It can."

In May, 1999, in Mendele Vol. 08.153, there appeared a very long article by
Prof. Janet Hadda (UCLA) which was originally published in the Jewish
Quarterly. Prof. Hadda, in addition to being a professor of Yiddish, is a
practicing psychoanalyst, and she uses her expertise to explain the how and
why of 2.

mourning over the death of Yiddish. It was after she wrote her Singer
biograhy that she "...finally admitted to myself that I could no longer
hope for the continuity of Yiddish."

Also in that same issue of Mendele, Iosif Vaisman, who at that time was the
moderator of Mendele, wrote a letter (originally published in the Jewish
Quarterly) with the subject: "The Life and Death of Yiddish". This was an
extended refutation of Prof. Hadda's argument. The key sentence in his
refutation is: "Unfortunately, Professor Hadda is not the only one who does
not see the Yiddish-speaking Hasidic communities." Vaisman's final comments
are worth quoting: " Most modern scientists consider language and culture
as integral parts of a unified semiotic space, which needs all its
components for proper functioning. What I do know is that as of today,
Yiddish has not exhausted its vital energy and its potential for the
future. And we have nothing to gain and a whole lot to lose by prematurely
proclaiming it dead."

In this same issue is printed Prof. Hadda's response to Vaisman. In it she
proclaims that she is anguished as she contemplates the death of Eastern
European Yiddishkeyt and its international offshoots. She also recognizes
that the Hasidim will certainly somehow contribute to the future of Yiddish
in America, but she questions the quality and efficacy of their Yiddish.
Her final words are: " My colleagues and I agree that the thriving
pre-World War II Yiddish world has permanently disappeared. And we do not
see authentic regeneration. However, although we believe we are facing what
seems to be inevitable, we would like nothing better than to be wrong."

Several months ago I read Zachary Sholom Berger's review of "Words on Fire"
which appeared in the Jewish Journal. This review was so favorable that I
was prompted to buy and read the book. I enjoyed reading the book because
in addition to its history of Yiddish, it filled in numerous lacunae in my
knowledge of Jewish history.

Your case that the Hasidim will ensure the survival of Yiddish for a long
time to come seems to be quite valid, and it is very reassuring. It also
counters the argument of Prof. Weiss in that the Hasidim are prepared to
deassimilate enough to regenerate their own language. Actually, the Hasidim
are merely continuing their daily use of the language, and so there is
nothing to regenerate.

I agree with you that all the current efforts which are consciously made to
preserve and foster the growth of Yiddish may be inadequate to accomplish
this task. However, I think we should not overlook the possibilities which
modern 3.

technology can create. For example, someone I know said: " A loshn muz hobn
a gas." It is my contention that computer technology and the Internet can
be the "gas" for Yiddish. Even Hasidim can benefit from the ability to
correspond with fellow Hasidim anywhere in the world in real Yiddish via
the Internet. Thanks to the efforts of the "meyvinim" who conduct UYIP
(understanding Yiddish information processing) Web site, this ability to
interact is constantly being improved.

The teaching of Yiddish, which you yourself are very much involved with,
can be greatly expanded by offering on-line courses. I am disappointed that
the NYBC (National Yiddish Book Cnter) has done nothing to create such a
course. The NYBC is planning to put all of Yiddish literature on the
Internet, but is doing nothing to create the readers who will read this
material.

I believe that the current efforts to preserve Yiddish will result in a
long lived Yiddish which is different from that of the Hasidim. What we
need now is to find some way to utilize the strengths of each group to
create a merger which will be of benefit to all.

Thank you for bringing the question of the survival of Yiddish to the fore
again, and for your optimistic views. I think you have done Yiddish a great
service with this most excellent book.

mit vareme yidishe grusn,

Morrie Feller

2)----------------------------------------------------
Date: April 22, 2005
Subject: Re: kuni-leml (Lucas Bruyn)

Ignaz Bernstein, Juedische Sprichwoerter und Redensarten, mentions
`kuene'(e for umlaut):

Kuene f. kueness, pl. (p. kuna.) Art Pranger (Engl. pillory), den man
in frueren Zeiten in Elementarschulen zur Bestrafung unfolgsamer Kinder
anwandte. Auch Erwachsene wurden fuer gewisse (besonders religioese)
Vergehen mit der "kuene" bestraft, indem sie sich einer demuetigenden
Zeremonie im `Pulish >[Vorhof, Vorhalle, Vestibulum der Synagoge, wo
gewoenlich die aermere Klasse ihren Platz findet] unterziehen mussten.
(In Polen wurden liederleche Frauenzimmer mit diesem Pranger bestraft,
`postawic w kunie')

[My concise Polish dict. only gives kuna - marten.]

Lucas Bruyn

3)----------------------------------------------------
Date: April 22, 2005
Subject: Re: di yidishe shikse


The Joe Fishstein Collection of Yiddish Poetry at McGill University in
Montreal contains a card that will probably be of interest, although it
does not say much about the radio personality known as "Di Yidishe shikse".
The card consists of a portrait of the songstress, along with the words and
music of "Dos lid fun der yesoymeh".  It can be viewed on the virtual
exhibit of the Fishstein website :
http://digital.library.mcgill.ca/fishstein.  On the home page, under
"Exhibit", press "Theatre", then click on the bottom left exhibit item:
"Dos lid fun der Yesoymeh".  A further click on the enlargement button will
enable you to see the portrait quite clearly, and to read the words, and
most of the music.

Goldie Sigal
Montreal, Que.
Canada

______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 14.047

Address for the postings to Mendele: mendele@lists.yale.edu
Address for the list commands: listproc@lists.yale.edu


