
Mendele: Yiddish literature and language
______________________________________________________
Contents of Vol. 12.014
February 19, 2003

1) 8th IAYC Conference (Sylvia Schildt)

1)----------------------------------------------------
Date: Tue, 29 Oct 2002 12:58:05 -0500 (EST)
From: Sylvia Schildt <creativa@charm.net>
Subject: IAYC 2003 Konferentz

Tayere mendelyaner:

Undzer konferentz vet forkumen in Boltimor, Sept 4-7 baym Hilton
Pikesville Hotel. 

Di heypt teme is:
Yidishe Lerers: Heldn Amol un Haynt

Undzere plener zaynen nokh nit in gantzn farkhasmet - ot iz a
forshpayz. Vaytere protim kent ir gefinen baym vebzaytl  
www.derbay.org.

Yiddish Teachers: Heroes Then and Now
International Association of Yiddish Clubs IAYC - 2003 Conference
September 4-7, 2003  Pikesville Hilton, Baltimore, MD

Tayere chaverim:  It is with great joy that we open the registration
for the eighth conference of the International Association of Yiddish
Clubs, an organization dedicated to promoting and maintaining the
uplifting values of Yiddish language, literature and culture.

Every conference has its own character -- in this one we are going back
to the roots of our Yiddish-kayt by saluting our Yidishe Lerers --
those hardy, talented individuals who gave so much of themselves as
well as those today who are continuing this tradition. We also
especially invite those who attended the Yidishe shules and summer
camps to this freylikhe simkhe of reunion. Our lerers and lererins
would have kvelled at what we have in store for Sept 4,5,6 and 7th, in
2003.

Our keynote speaker will be Gella Schweid Fishman who established the
Secular Schools in America Collection at Stanford University
(California). Collection who will speak on the topic:

The Secular Yiddish Schools in North America: An Archival Collection as
a Living Source of Jewish Creativity

Henry Sapoznik creator of the Yiddish Radio Project and Director of
Living Traditions, will hold a very important plenary session on
Yiddish Education and the KlezKamp Phenomenon. KlezKamp, now in its
18th year, has been a major force in producing a new generation of
enthusiasts of Yiddish music, language ,literature and culture and
there is much we can learn from its phenomenal success.

Our closing speaker will be David Weintraub, Executive Director of the
Dora Teitelboim Center for Yiddish Culture, who will share with us
insights into their work to return Yiddish language and culture into
the mainstream of Jewish life in Southern Florida.

Highlights include:

International singer/khazn Avi Albrecht, who sings Yiddish songs with
harts & neshome

A musical salute to Mikhl Gelbart with Lori Cahan Simon

An ongoing reunion of shule and summer camp alumni (bring pictures,
show and tell goodies)

The big band sounds of the Baltimore Klezmer Orchestra

The unique music of Baltimore1s wildly popular Charm City Klezmer

Mayn Oytzer -- a concert of Yiddish songs with Sender Botvinik, Sherm
Labovitz & Marvin Weisberger from their CD published by the Sholem
Aleichem Club of Philadelphia.

An exhibit of unique & personal MOLLY PICON MEMORABILIA with collector
Irwin Kramer

Tours of Baltimore's world-famous Inner Harbor attractions

A special tour of historic and very unique Jewish Baltimore

Plus 29 workshops featuring old favorites and new discoveries -- here
is just a forshpayz -- many, many more to be announced. Some in
Yiddish, some in English, some in both. Yiddish classes, beginner to
advanced, will also be offered. Plus screenings of the new
Australian-Yiddish film "Uncle Chatzkel."

Presenters agreed on so far:

Troim Katz Handler (sister of Dovid Katz), daughter of Yiddish poet
Menke Katz will speak on Women and Sex in Judaism and read from her
newly published book of poetry Simkhe published by IAYC.

Miriam Beckerman  Mayn Lerer Dovid Katz

Herman Taube, noted author, educator, lecturer, poet, Forverts
correspondent.

Morrie Feller: Kompyuteray -- Getting it Write in Yiddish

Judith Seid  Secular Options in Yiddishkayt

William Tenn Sholem Aleykhem meets Science Fiction in "On Venus Have We
Got a Rabbi"

A Dvar Torah on the Parshe of the Week Ki Tetze in Yiddish

Mayn Shtetele Brunzvil -- Sylvia Schildt launches her new bilingual
book of Brownsville (Brooklyn)  memories to be published by the IAYC

Sholem Berger Young Yiddish poet, journalist, publisher of online Der
Bavebter Yid

Motl Rosenbush Founder of the Yidish Svives. How to start a Yidish
Svive in Your Town.

Anna Gonshor, Head of Yiddish at Montreal's Peretz & Bialik Schools,
Teacher of Yiddish at McGill and Columbia U. Summer Courses - Also will
speak about Kadya Maladovska, Yiddish writer and teacher of Yiddish in
pre-War Warsaw

Prof. Max Ticktin - topic to be announced

Hilda Rubin - Yiddish theatre as a means of teaching language

Betty Tepper - Yiddish Tango from Buenos Aires to the world!

Fanny Yocur - Dialogues for Yiddish Conversation

Iosif Vaisman - Internet as a tool for teaching Yiddish, and a second
workshop on "Equations of Poetry: Hersh Segal, his friends, his pupils,
and flourishing of Yiddish culture in Czernowitz between the World
Wars."

Shelby Shapiro -Continues his fascinating exploration of the Yidishe
Ganovim.

Dr. Sheva Zucker - Author of top-rated Yiddish texbook, introduces
long-awaited Book Two.
                            
Plus Classes in Yiddish for beginners, intermediate and advanced
students

Note to Yiddishe Lerers worldwide: If you are coming to the conference
and would like to volunteer a workshop about Yiddish classes in your
country, showcase texts and educational materials, please contact
Sylvia at creativa@charm.net.

Note to alumni of the various Yidishe shules - Arbeter Ring, Sholem
Aleykhen, Farband, Ordn, Bialik, Peretz and the Camps - Kinder Ring,
Nayvelt, Kinderland, Boiberik -- this is your chance to get together
for a HISTORIC REUNION with fellow students and campers.

The Conference will take place at the beautiful Hilton Pikesville Hotel
in the heart of the hospitable Jewish Community with nearby restaurants
(including kosher) shuls of all denominations. Jewish Baltimore is
being recognized as the Yerushalayim d'Amerika. It is also the hometown
of Henrietta Szold, founder of Hadassah, and the girlhood home of
Yiddish actress Bessie Thomashevsky.

Baltimore is easily accessible by plane (BWI) and by Amtrak trains. Its
strategic location makes it an easy drive from Washington and Virginia,
Pittsburgh and Philadelphia, as well as the NY/NJ metro areas.

The hotel is comfortable yet intimate with a host of amenities
including a restaurant, a sports bar for light fare, indoor tennis, a
fitness center, even an on-site beauty salon.

Re: Kosher and Shabbes arrangements: All breakfasts and afternoon
breaks will be kosher. Friday night meal will be kosher. Kosher options
available for all other meals at additional cost. For Thursday and
Friday lunch there are kosher restaurants near the hotel.

On site conducted Orthodox services available Saturday morning. There
are other shuls and temples nearby, all flavors.Those remaining in the
hotel will be served kosher lunches.  Sunday's pre-departure box lunch
will be kosher.

Sal Kluger's Simkha Sales will be on hand with books, tapes, CD's and
goodies -- plus a special selection of Yiddish educational materials..

For those with shpilkes -- Baltimore is a great town to visit -- the
Inner Harbor with its shops and restaurants draws millions of visitors
every year. There are also art museums, the National Aquarium, the
Maryland Science Center, the Babe Ruth Museum, the Flag House, Camden
Yards and nearby Fort McHenry (birthplace of the Star Spangled Banner)
to name but a few. Edgar Allen Poe fans will have a field day.

With a line-up like this at such a prime location, you can readily
expect the limited spaces to fill up long before the conference closing
dates. So the smart move is to make your reservations NOW. Prices will
go up after July 1st but the prime reason to act now is to be sure you
are not left out. Remember Miami???

There will also be a guided post-conference tour of Jewish Baltimore by
advance sign-up only.

'Gelt' Money-Saving Coupons We are organizing a coupon program for
conferees with discounts and two-fers, etc. at local restaurants and
shops of interest.

The registartion form is available at http://www.derbay.org
or from creativa@charm.net

For questions call Sylvia Schildt, (410) 298-4765 or e-mail:
creativa@charm.net.

Mit vareme yidishe grusn,

Sylvia Schildt, 
Chair/Forzitz
______________________________________________________
End of Mendele Vol. 12.014

Address for the postings to Mendele: mendele@lists.yale.edu
Address for the list commands: listproc@lists.yale.edu

Mendele on the Web:

http://www.mendele.net
http://ibiblio.org/yiddish/mendele.html
                   


